Modelling the trophic role of marine mammals in tropical areas, L. Morissette et al. 
 
47 
Additional data that became available after this workshop were included in the model, and thus greatly 
improved the predictive ability of our model simulations. We received a great amount of feedback from 
local experts, fisherman, and stakeholders about our model development and methodology. We also 
identified additional data on biomass, diet, and fishing effort for many species included in the model. As a 
consequence, we think that we increased our accuracy to represent key ecological processes in Northwest 
African waters.  
 
Strengths and weaknesses of these modelling efforts 
The synthesis of available ecosystem information is allowing to have a whole-system view using 
parameters that are basic to understanding populations and the ecosystem (Okey and Pauly 1999). 
However, models are not a perfect representation of the reality. The uncertainties remaining in the 
understanding of the ecosystem structure and function may occur for different reasons. In some case, it is 
just because no data exist on the key species. In other cases, aggregation of species within one ecological 
box is inappropriate. Finally unknown mechanisms can also occur in the ecosystem (Morissette et al. 
2003). For example, in Ecopath models, the only mechanism used to represent interactions between 
species is direct consumption. It ignores the fact that consumers often do more than skim production off 
their prey; consumers can shift diet composition to species with lower productivity and alter the P/B ratio 
of the group (Ruesink 1998), or have behaviours that indirectly affect other species in the system.  
The structure of the model provides an overall view of the ecosystem and reveals the uncertainties that 
could be examined in future studies. Consequently, one of the most important questions that can be asked 
of Ecopath models is: in which portion of the food web are the dynamics most uncertain? (Ruesink 1998). 
In our case, addressing the uncertainties linked to cetaceans and commercially important fish species was  
very important. On the other hand, a common problem in ecosystem modelling is that less information is 
available for the lower trophic levels (Moreau et al. 1993; Walline et al. 1993; Lin et al. 1999). These 
recurrent gaps generally force modellers to rely heavily on the literature and arbitrary assumptions to 
construct the models (Moreau et al. 1993), and the Northwest African region was no exception to that. 
This emphasizes the need for an increased research effort into the biomass, production, consumption, and 
diet of the various species of the ecosystem, not only the larger fish. 
Finally, in order to have reliable prediction from the model’s simulations, it is very important ot have local 
time series data on biomass, catch, and fishing effort. Unfortunately, such time series are very scarce in 
the Northwest African region. Even if our different uncertainty analyses suggested that our major findings 
are unlikely to change if we change data inputs, local research efforts aiming to fill the gaps in our 
knowledge of data would be useful. In that sense, that report represents a great tool to identify these gaps.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Authors would like to thank all the participants to the Dakar workshop for providing inputs and 
comments on the methods and data used for the construction of this model. Special thanks are also given 
to Martial Laurans, Didier Gascuel, and Jean-Claude Brêthes for providing data and support for 
constructing this preliminary version of the model. 
 
REFERENCES 
Aguilar A. and Borrell, A. 2007. Open-boat whaling on the straits of Gibraltar ground and adjacent waters. Marine Mammal Science 
23: 322-342 
Ainsworth, C.H. 2006. Strategic marine ecosystem restoration in Northern British Columbia. PhD thesis, University of British 
Columbia, Canada. 
Allen, K.R. 1971. Relation between production and biomass. Journal of Fisheries Research Board of Canada 28: 1573-1581. 
Amorim, P., Duarte, G., Guerra, M. Morato, T., and Stobberup, K.A. 2004. Preliminary Ecopath model of the Guinea-Bissau 
continental shelf ecosystem (NW Africa), pp. 95-112. In Palomares, M.L.D., and Pauly, D. (eds.) West African marine 
ecosystems: models and fisheries impacts. Fisheries Centre Research Reports 12(7). 
Armstrong, A.J., Siegfried, W.R. 1991. Consumption of Antarctic krill by minke whales. Antarctic Science 3(1): 13-8. 
