Modelling the trophic role of marine mammals in tropical areas, L. Morissette et al. 
 
53
FOOD WEB MODEL AND DATA FOR STUDYING THE INTERACTIONS BETWEEN 
MARINE MAMMALS AND FISHERIES IN THE CARIBBEAN ECOSYSTEMa 
Jenny Lynn Melgo1, Lyne Morissette1,2,3, Kristin Kaschner4 and Leah R. Gerber1 
 
1Arizona State University, School of Life Sciences, 
P.O. Box 874501, Tempe, AZ 85287-4501, USA  
2Institut des sciences de la mer de Rimouski, 
310, Allée des Ursulines, C.P. 3300, Rimouski, QC, G5L 3A1, CANADA  
3Fisheries Centre, The University of British Columbia 
2202 Main Mall, Vancouver BC V6T 1Z4, CANADA 
4Albert-Ludwigs-University, Institute of Biology I (Zoology) 
Evolutionary Biology and Ecology Lab, Freiburg, GERMANY  
Lyne.Morissette@globetrotter.net 
Jennylynn.Melgo@asu.edu 
Kristin.Kaschner@biologie.uni-freiburg.de 
Leah.Gerber@asu.edu 
ABSTRACT 
A mass balanced ecosystem model was constructed to examine the trophic interaction between 
whales and fisheries in the Caribbean ecosystem. This model includes data from the ecosystem 
models of the Lesser Antilles, Bahia Ascencion Mexican Caribbean, Southern Mexican Caribbean, 
Grenada and the Grenadines, Colombian Caribbean Sea, Caribbean coral reef ecosystem, Costa 
Rica, Eastern Tropical Pacific and Central Atlantic. Our model includes twenty nine trophic 
groups for the Caribbean ecosystem model, comprising 10 marine mammal groups, one seabird 
group, one sea turtle group, eleven fish groups, one cephalopod group, one crustaceans and 
benthos group, one benthic producers group, one zooplankton, one phytoplankton and one 
detritus group. Time series catches of some cetaceans and all fish and non-fish groups in 1987’s to 
2005’s are also included in the model. Data quality, uncertainty, Ecoranger and simulation 
analysis for the removal of great whales and fisheries in the ecosystem are included in this report.   
 
INTRODUCTION 
A food web is defined as the complex trophic links between organisms (prey-predator) living in an 
ecosystem. The prey-predator relationships in food webs are typically arranged in oriented graphs 
with hierarchical or layered structures that show energy pathways and matter transfer within the 
ecosystem (Paine et al. 1998; Pimm 2002). The structure and functions of food webs are 
                                                
a Cite as: Melgo, J.L., Morissette, L., Kaschner, K., and Gerber, L. (2009) Food web model and data for studying the 
interactions between marine mammals and fisheries in the Caribbean ecosystem. In: Morissette, L., Melgo, J.L., Kaschner, 
K. and Gerber, L.R. (eds.) Modelling the trophic role of marine mammals in tropical areas: data requirements, 
uncertainty, and validation. Fisheries Centre Research Reports XX(X). Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada, pp. 48-107. 
 
