--- PDF PAGE 1 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 1
Summary of Scientific Sessions and Workshops
and List of Best Presentations at PICES-2014
Science Board Symposium (S1)
Toward a better understanding of the North Pacific: Reflecting on the past and steering for the future
Co-Convenors: Thomas Therriault (SB), Angelica Peña (BIO), Elizabeth Logerwell (FIS), Chuanlin Huo
(MEQ), Jennifer Boldt (MONITOR), Kyung-Il Chang (POC), Toru Suzuki (TCODE), Steven Bograd (AICE), 
Hiroaki Saito (COVE), Phillip Mundy (SOFE), Igor Shevchenko (Russia)
Invited Speakers:
Iris Hendriks (University of the Balearic Islands, Spain)
Akihide Kasai (Kyoto University, Japan)
Jacquelynne King (Pacific Biological Station, Canada)
Backgroud
For more than two decades, PICES has been the forum for scientists to develop a better understanding of
North Pacific ecosystem structure and functions and a place to reflect on what changes are occurring. Two
integrative scientific programs have been at the core of PICES activities: CCCC (Climate Change and
Carrying Capacity) and FUTURE (Forecasting and Understanding Trends, Uncertainty and Responses of
North Pacific Marine Ecosystems). While they have advanced our knowledge of the patterns and
mechanisms of ecosystem change in the North Pacific, many unknowns remain. FUTURE is developing a
predictive capability for North Pacific ecosystem change, but many fundamental scientific questions remain
that are beyond its scope. PICES-2014 was an opportunity for a diverse scientific community to assess the
current understanding of marine ecosystems in the North Pacific, to broadly discuss scientific questions that are
not being adequately addressed, and to identify the fundamental scientific questions that remain to be answered.
Summary of presentations
Hae Jin Jeong (Seoul National University, R Korea) gave the keynote lecture on “Red tides in North Pacific 
coastal waters: What have we learned and what else do we need to know?” He reviewed trends in the outbreak 
of red tides and nutrients (DIN) in north Pacific countries, Korea, Japan, China and Russia, which showed that, 
generally, a reduction in nutrient concentration leads to a reduction in red tide outbreaks. He showed that, 
however, trends differ among species of phytoplankton due to differences in location, depth (offshore or 
inshore), and transport. He also explained that differences in behavior of phytoplankton species, such as 
vertical migration and mixotrophy, are important considerations, as are direct and indirect biological 
interactions such as predator-prey, inhibition and competition. He concluded the presentation by predicting that 
with ocean warming (and consequently deeper thermocline and reduced wind-driven upwelling), decreased 
nutrients, and increased sewage treatment outflow we should expect to see slow-growing, fast-swimming 
species dominate red tide outbreaks. Finally, he provided insight into future research needs to better understand 
red tides in North Pacific coastal waters.
The first of three invited speakers was Iris Hendriks (Instituto Mediterráneo de Estudios Avanzados, Spain). 
She spoke about “Pathways of Arctic Ocean acidification”. She introduced the topic by explaining that 
although it is often argued that polar oceans are in great danger of experiencing increased ocean acidification 
there is much that is not known about the multiple pathways for acidification and the vulnerability of Arctic 
organisms. In fact, at the large scale, the Arctic shows lower CO2 concentrations in the ocean compared to 
global levels, especially during summer. This is generally understood to be because of uptake of CO2 during 
ice-edge phytoplankton blooms, sea ice melting and freshwater input (from melting ice caps and rivers). 
Although which processes and pathways will dominate and whether they will buffer or amplify the effects of 
increased CO2 differs from region to region in the Arctic. More refined models are needed to reduce this 
--- PDF PAGE 2 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 2
uncertainty. In addition, more experimental research is needed on the vulnerability of Arctic organisms to 
ocean acidification. In closing, Dr. Hendriks concluded that the Arctic Ocean is at a crossroads where 
freshening of the ocean and biological responses will likely be key drivers of the ecosystem response to 
acidification and she recommended increased international collaboration and more process-oriented studies to 
better understand drivers and pathways.
The second invited speaker was Jacquelynne King (Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Canada), she gave a 
thought-provoking talk on the relationship between PICES’ current Science Program, FUTURE, and its 
predecessor, CCCC. She also provided a summary of the evaluation FUTURE has recently undergone and 
made recommendations for ways to go forward. Recognition of the need to develop an integrated Science 
Program and the need to link PICES efforts to the international GLOBEC program lead to the formation of the 
CCCC program. Dr. King highlighted some of the major accomplishments of the CCCC task teams. An 
evaluation of the CCCC program, published in 2008, indicated that the most progress was made in the area of 
climatology and physics. The least was made at the ecosystem level. Dr. King then reviewed how FUTURE 
was developed through the work of a Science Plan writing team and the Implementation Plan writing team. 
She pointed out that FUTURE had most questions focused on the ecosystem level and the structure was 
designed with the goal of making FUTURE more integrated with PICES than CCCC had been. Turning 
attention to the present and the road ahead, Dr. King reviewed the work underway, in terms of new Working 
Groups established to address the science questions of FUTURE. She also summarized the findings of the 
2014 FUTURE Evaluation Panel Report which described positives and also needs for improvement. She 
described the change in governance structure recommended by the Evaluation Panel. She also made several 
suggestions for FUTURE Expert Groups, such as re-focusing on NEMURO. Finally she advocated for the 
return of intersessional workshops for Expert Groups. In closing she encourage the PICES community to 
improve international collaboration specific to FUTURE and to prioritize science questions pertinent to 
FUTURE, closing with a quote from Lewis Carroll: “If you know where you are going, any road will get you 
there”.
The third invited speaker was Akihide Kasai (Kyoto University, Japan) who spoke on “High fishery 
production supported by complex coastal ecosystems”. One of the over-arching themes of his presentation was 
that organisms that can take advantage of complexity in the environment will succeed. The other theme was 
that one needs to pay attention to estuarine and river areas for conservation of marine fish species. To illustrate 
these two themes, Dr. Kasai provided an integrated and interesting synthesis of a large body of research on 
temperate seabass in Tango Bay and Yura River estuary in central Japan. The research of Dr. Kasai and his 
students showed that seabass use different habitats depending on their life history stage: hatching offshore and 
then moving to coastal areas, estuaries and rivers as they age. Furthermore they show that the use of estuaries 
and rivers varies among portions of the population with important implications for feeding and growth. This is 
a unique life history and emphasizes that the seabass population is supported by the adaptive use of complex 
ecosystems.
In addition to the three excellent invited presentations, the symposium program included submitted talks on a 
range of research topics pertaining to the overarching symposium theme of “…a better understanding of the 
North Pacific”.
Shin-ichi Ito (Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, Japan) gave a presentation on “Formation of 
offshore ecological hotspots and its fluctuation in the western North Pacific”. He introduced his presentation 
with the question “Why is the western North Pacific rich in productivity and diversity?” He then presented the 
hypothesis that the Kuroshio current transports larvae offshore where a quasi steady jet (the Isoguchi Jet) 
produces offshore ecological hotspots and transports larvae and juveniles such that they can utilize these 
hotspots. Survey and remote-sensing data support this hypothesis but there are a few remaining issues to 
investigate, related to the challenge of investigating the impacts of fluctuations in limited local key areas to 
large marine ecosystems, an area ideal for FUTURE related work. 
--- PDF PAGE 3 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 3
Jack Barth (Oregon State University, USA) talked about “What goes on beneath the waves and when we’re not 
watching”. He provided numerous examples of new ways of measuring small-scale oceanographic processes 
and features below the surface of the ocean. Instruments such as gliders, yo-yo-ing moorings and robotic 
platforms provide measurements to supplement ship-based observations, for instance during winter when it can 
be difficult to conduct a ship survey. A large amount of data at small scales can often be collected with these 
types of instruments. Dr. Barth concluded by saying that the overall goal of collecting these data is to evaluate 
the effect of meso- and submesoscale events on large-scale dynamics, and emphasizing the need to continue 
ship-based work and process studies.
Emanuele Di Lorenzo (Georgia Institute of Technology, USA) gave a presentation on “Forecasting North 
Pacific climate and ecosystem changes: Advances and challenges”. He discussed cases where advances have 
been made in understanding Pacific climate variability and change over the last few decades. In brief, advances 
have been made concerning eastern and western boundary climate connections with a forecast potential of 3-10 
years. In addition, advances have been made regarding the tropics and north Pacific climate connection with a 
forecast potential of around 1 year. As an example of the challenges in forecasting due to the relationship 
between mean climate state and the dynamics of climate variability, Dr. Di Lorenzo discussed the 2014 ENSO 
event, which did not materialize as forecast perhaps because the mean climate state has changed. 
Elena Dulepova (Pacific Research Fisheries Center (TINRO-center), Russia) talked about “Northwestern 
Pacific subarctic marine ecosystems structure and possible trends of it changing in nearest future”, reporting 
on what is known now about the ecosystems of the Okhotsk Sea and the western Bering Sea (in terms of 
structure, dynamics and functioning) and if/how will these systems change into the future. The research she 
discussed is based on a large volume of ecosystem survey data, from more than 500 TINRO research cruises in 
total. The knowledge gained from these surveys includes biomass distribution across trophic levels, fish 
species composition and abundance (benthic, epipelagic and mesopelagic), biocenotic zoning of nekton, and 
zooplankton species composition and biomass. Dr. Dulepova then talked about what determines the current
dynamics of biota in these seas. TINRO’s research suggests that natural factors are the main cause: climate and 
oceanography, ecosystem interactions (bottom-up and top-down control) and population factors. Finally, 
looking to the future, Dr. Dulepova explained that the ecosystems appear to be in a period of large-scale 
change in the trends of many natural processes (geophysical, climatic and oceanographic), although predicting 
the direction of coming changes is difficult if not impossible. She closed her presentation with a quote from 
Robert Andres Millikan (Nobel Prize in Physics 1923) “Fullness of knowledge always means some 
understanding of the depths of our ignorance” and the observation that the more we study an ecosystem the 
more questions we have about its structure and function.
Sinjae Yoo (Korea Institute of Ocean Science & Technology, R Korea) gave a presentation entitled “How 
much do we know about the 88-91 regime shift in the southwestern East Sea ecosystem?” He presented 
research that suggests that this shift was unique in that it was a step change caused by a synergy of climate 
change and anthropogenic forcing. He introduced his presentation by explaining that there was an increase in 
zooplankton biomass and chlorophyll concentration in 89/90 in the East Sea that was consistent with shifts in a 
number of climate indices. The likely cause was an increase in nutrient (Nitrogen concentrations) through 
atmospheric deposition, but equally if not more importantly, from increased river discharge volume, increased 
nutrient loading in rivers such as the Changjiang River and changes in circulation. 
Robert Blasiak (The University of Tokyo, Japan) gave a presentation from the world of economics and game 
theory about “Hegemony and shared dominance in marine capture fisheries”. His research focus is on using 
game theory to describe the potential for transboundary cooperation in the high seas. He developed game 
theoretic models for a range of situations from one where no one party (or “player”) dominates to others with 
shared small-group dominance, two-player dominance and single-player dominance. He found that the greater 
the number of dominant players, the more international agreements were reached, illustrating his model results 
with real-world examples.
--- PDF PAGE 4 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 4
Anela Choy (Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center, USA) talked about “Projected responses of the central 
North Pacific pelagic ecosystem to climate-induced changes in micronekton communities”. Mid-trophic 
micronekton (small fish, crustaceans and cephalopods) are key prey for large pelagic fish in the central North 
Pacific. The objective of Ms. Choy’s research was to evaluate the importance of groups of micronekton using 
an updated Ecopath with Ecosim food web model with more specific groups of micronekton categories. 
Simulations and sensitivity analyses showed examples both of direct impacts of changes in micronekton 
abundance (i.e., predator abundance decreases when micronekton abundance decreases) and indirect impacts 
such as competition (i.e., predator abundance increases when micronekton abundance decreases). Simulations 
also showed that changes in crustacean and squid micronekton groups caused the largest negative responses in 
predator abundance.
Aigo Takeshige gave a presentation on “Estimation of the future change of anchovy recruitment in response to 
global warming off western coast of Kyushu, Japan”. The background of Dr. Takeshige’s research is the 
hypothesis that connectivity between spawning and nursery grounds is important for anchovy recruitment. The 
objective of his work is to examine how climate change impacts hydrodynamic and biological conditions and 
thus anchovy recruitment and the fishery. He developed a coupled hydrodynamic and particle tracking 
simulation, used with predicted future environmental change under the IPCC A2 scenario. He found that larval 
distribution shifted northward, away from offshore areas, with climate change due to increased transport, 
changing the connectivity between spawning and nursery grounds. Using mixed layer depth as a proxy for 
food availability, he also showed that food limits growth rate with the higher temperatures predicted by the 
climate scenario. 
Jake Rice (Fisheries and Oceans, Canada) wrapped up the symposium with a talk entitled “So now people
believe that the ocean is changing – And so is the climate. NOW what?” He touched on a variety of themes 
including policy, processes underlying climate linkages, trajectories and rates of climate change, consequences 
and adaptation and the PICES FUTURE program.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Red tides in North Pacific coastal waters: What have we learned and what else do we need to know? (Keynote)
Hae Jin Jeong 
Pathways of Arctic Ocean acidification
Iris E. Hendriks, Melissa Chierici and Carlos M. Duarte (Invited)
Formation of offshore ecological hotspots and its fluctuation in the western North Pacific
Shin-ichi Ito, Taku Wagawa, Shigeho Kakehi and Takeshi Okunishi
What goes on beneath the waves and when we’re not watching
John A. Barth
Looking back to go forward (Invited)
Jacquelynne King
Forecasting North Pacific climate and ecosystem changes: Advances and challenges
Emanuele Di Lorenzo, Nathan Mantua and Mathew Newman
Northwestern Pacific subarctic marine ecosystems structure and possible trends of it changing in nearest future
Elena P. Dulepova
How much do we know about the 88-91 regime shift in the southwestern East Sea ecosystem?
Sinjae Yoo, Chan Joo Jang, Joo-Eun Yoon and Soonmi Lee
High fishery production supported by complex coastal ecosystems (Invited)
Akihide Kasai
Hegemony and shared dominance in marine capture fisheries
Robert Blasiak and Nobuyuki Yagi
Projected responses of the central North Pacific pelagic ecosystem to climate-induced changes in micronekton 
communities
C. Anela Choy, Phoebe Woodworth-Jefcoats and Jeffrey J. Polovina
--- PDF PAGE 5 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 5
Estimation of the future change of anchovy recruitment in response to global warming off western coast of Kyushu, Japan
Aigo Takeshige, Shingo Kimura, Yoichi Miyake, Hideaki Nakata and Takashi Kitagawa
So now people believe that the ocean is changing – And so is the climate. NOW what?
Jake Rice
Poster presentations
Effects of volcanism on sockeye salmon Oncorhynchus nerka abundance in Kamchstka River
Victor F. Bugaev
Impact of climate change on the egg and larval transport of Japanese anchovy Engraulis japonicas off western coast of 
Kyushu, Japan
Shingo Kimura, Aigo Takeshige, Yoichi Miyake, Hideaki Nakata and Takashi Kitagawa
Interannual variability of chlorophyll associated with mixed layer depth changes in the East Sea (Japan Sea)
Chan Joo Jang, Youngji Joh and Sinjae Yoo
BIO Topic Session (S2)
Strengths and limitations of habitat modeling: Techniques, data sources, and predictive capabilities
Co-Convenors: Enyuan Fan (China), Elliott Hazen (USA), Sei-Ichi Saitoh (Japan), William Sydeman (USA), 
Yutaka Watanuki (Japan)
Invited Speakers:
Hiroto Murase (National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries, Japan)
Martin Renner (University of Washington, USA)
Background
Habitat modeling is a powerful tool used to identify key factors affecting the distribution of marine
organisms and underlying mechanisms, to predict optimal fishing grounds, to evaluate human impacts on
ecosystems, and to project distribution shifts in the face of climate change. Given their broad application and
utility, evaluation of the strengths and weakness of various modeling approaches is becoming increasingly 
important. Environmental data primarily come from satellite-based SST, SST gradient, SSH, Chl-a and their
variation across time, and geographic features such as shelf breaks. Distribution data are collected from
various sources, including ship-based line transect surveys, animal tracking, fisheries activities (log data,
satellite-based fishing light distribution) and hence contain inevitable biases, including the selection of the
survey line and season, tagging location of tracked animals, sample sizes, and type of the fishing activities.
Biases are also inherent in the models being used – Generalized linear and additive models (GLMs and
GAMs), Random Forests, boosted regression approaches, and Maximum Entropy modeling (MaxEnt). The
intention of the session was to examine factors causing biases, identify the direction of biases, discuss
techniques for mitigating or accounting for biases, and create a best-practices guide for using habitat 
modeling approaches to predict the distribution of marine organisms in dynamic marine environments.
Summary of presentations
This session was a welcome addition to common themes explored in PICES meetings and focused on 
mechanisms of habitat modeling analysis rather than focusing on a specific type of study organism. It was 
well-attended and there was a variety of topics in the presentations, focusing on different ecosystems, trophic 
levels (coral to whales) and at many different scales – from fine-scale predictions to basin-wide.
In his invited lecture, Dr. Hiroto Murase discussed many of the pros and cons between habitat and mechanistic 
models. The former is good for understanding static pictures while the latter is better for understanding 
processes. He used an ensemble of statistical models to predict Sei whale abundance in the west Pacific and 
--- PDF PAGE 6 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 6
found a range of both predictive accuracy and overall predicted spatial scales. The take-home message was that 
for sei-whale sightings data, Machine-learning models (Random Forests and Boosted Regression Trees) and 
generalized additive models (GAMs) performed best (sequentially). However, satellite tracks from Sei whales 
did not seem to match well with the modeled habitat highlighting the need for examining both datasets. 
The second invited lecture by Dr. Martin Renner focused on the North Pacific seabird database using 
climatological sightings data. He, like Dr. Murase, used a suite of models, and found that model success varied 
quite a bit. In fact, the ensemble model performed more poorly than some of the individual models. In 
addition, Martin presented that kriging may outperform kernel density for filling the gaps between 
observations. 
Dr. Chris Rooper gave a presentation on the habitat modeling of deep sea corals in the Gulf of Alaska and 
Bering Strait. Given the zero-inflated nature of the data, he modeled presence / absence and abundance 
separately in what is termed a hurdle model. He also used a camera sled to groundtruth the trawl catches of 
corals, finding that the camera sled did a better job sampling corals than the benthic trawls.
Dr. Bill Sydeman gave a talk for Jarrod Santora on mechanistically modeling krill hotspots in the California 
Current. He showed that ROMS-model based predictions of krill patch size, intensity and persistence were 
centered at 37° latitude, and intensity and persistence both related well to seabird densities that foraged in the 
California Current. The contrast between mechanistic, individual based models presented by Bill and the 
statistical models presented by the other speakers highlighted the need to look at both approaches in concert.
Dr. Hiroko Sasaki gave a talk on predicting zooplankton abundance as a function of the environment. She 
focused specifically on arctic and Pacific copepods and used GAMMs to predict their distribution relative to 
environmental variables with year as a random covariate. Interestingly, the habitat envelopes of the two groups 
of copepods were quite similar, with Pacific copepods having a slightly stronger relationship with temperature.
Dr. Irene Alabia gave a talk on habitat suitability models for neon flying squid in the western Pacific. Rather 
than using a single model, she used a model ensemble and like Dr. Murase compared the results from each of 
the models. The ensemble models were chosen and weighted based on the prediction-based validation. There 
was also quite a bit of variability among years in model success, potentially because of the nature of the 
resource (less vs. more densely aggregated).
Dr. Yoon-Kyung Lee presented on a GIS based habitat map for common squid. Her research used a more 
qualitative method with strong predictive success to sum up the correlations among environmental variables 
and common squid CPUE on a pixel-by-pixel basis. The weighting of each parameter was decided based on 
the frequency of catch and each environmental variable and ultimately the habitat envelope data were summed 
into a habitat probability index.
Dr. Yukiko Inoue presented bycatch models of wandering and black-browed albatross using tag-based and 
fisheries bycatch data. As bycatch is a function of species distribution and fishing effort, multiple models were 
used sequentially. Distribution was predicted as a function of environmental variables and predicted for islands 
without tracking data. Bycatch was predicted in two models: as a function of environmental variables and gear 
type. Unfortunately, the models showed that bycatch mitigation techniques did not show an across the board 
reduction in bycatch but more data are likely needed to make a conclusive decision.
Dr. Patrick O’Hara gave a talk on predicting Cassin’s Auklet habitat relative to environmental stressors of 
microplastics and oil. His models were very robust in predicting both survey and tracking-based distribution of 
birds. When overlaying the modeled habitat with microplastics, there was little overlap but vessel traffic was 
directed through important areas. Cassin’s Auklets are of conservation concern for Canada and there are 
ongoing efforts for spatial management around Triangle Island to protect this important population.
--- PDF PAGE 7 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 7
The final talk was given by Dr. Hiromichi Igarashi who created a near-real time model of neon flying squid 
using ROMS model output. He used a suite of modeling techniques, and created a complex super-ensemble, 
regressing the suite of models against CPUE rather than the common approach of weighted averaging. Using 
an EOF on the super-ensemble output he was able to decompose the results based on spatio-temporal scale into 
fine, medium, and large scale. He then was able to highlight how the various scales improved in their 
predictive capacity, in addition to the single vs. super-ensemble, as a function of good and bad fishing years.
Conclusions
– The suite of modeling techniques presented, with some authors using up to 10 different models highlights 
the importance of comparing model results. As technological capability continues to increase, more 
complex multi-model ensembles can improve our predictive capacity. 
– In addition, the talks examined multiple trophic levels from copepods up to marine mammals highlighting 
the need for statistical habitat modeling. 
– Finally, the difference between mechanistic (individual-based models) vs. statistical (many presented here) 
was highlighted by a number of speakers. In fact, the possibility of combining these approaches, e.g.,
using the habitat model output as an input for mechanistic models was suggested by one of the speakers. 
This has the potential to greatly improve our capabilities in predicting habitat, including for use in near￾real time management of fisheries resources.
This session shows the successes of the Spatial Ecology plan by the AP-MBM and will contribute to the 3-year 
report.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Application of habitat models to highly mobile marine animals – Cetaceans in the North Pacific as case studies (Invited)
Hiroto Murase, Toshihide Kitakado, Yu Kanaji, Hiroko Sasaki, Yoko Mitani, Koji Matsuoka, Makoto Okazaki and Naohisa 
Kanda
Crossvalidating approaches to modeling habitat and distribution of seabirds at-sea (Invited)
Martin Renner
Distribution modeling for deep-sea corals and sponges in Alaska
Chris Rooper, Mark Zimmermann, Mike Sigler and Jerry Hoff
Modeling temporal variation in krill “hotspots”: Size, intensity, persistence and coherence with krill predators
Jarrod A. Santora, Jeffrey Dorman and William J. Sydeman
Prediction of zooplankton community Spatial-Temporal patterns in the Chukchi Sea – Case study using habitat modeling 
approach
Hiroko Sasaki, Kohei Matsuno, Atsushi Yamaguchi, Yutaka Watanuki and Takashi Kikuchi
Comparison of habitat suitability models for neon flying squid (Ommastrephes bartramii) in western and central North 
Pacific
Irene Alabia, Sei-Ichi Saitoh, Hiromichi Igarashi, Yoichi Ishikawa, Norihisa Usui, Masafumi Kamachi, Awaji Toshiyuki and 
Masaki Seito
GIS-based potential habitat mapping for Todarodes pacificus (common squid)
Yoon-Kyung Lee, Inhye Park, Sang-Woo Kim, Jong-Kuk Choi, Saro Lee and Joo-Hyung Ryu
Is seabird bycatch rate affected by the seabird distribution? Estimation of seabird distribution for bycatch risk 
assessment
Yukiko Inoue, Makoto Okazaki, Maria P. Dias, Cleo Small and Hiroshi Minami
Cassin’s Auklet at-sea distribution and exposure to stressors such as ship-source oil pollution and microplastics
Patrick D. O’Hara, Ken Morgan, Jamie McDevitt-Irwin, Jean-Pierre W. Desforges, Peter S. Ross and Sean Boyd
A multi-model ensemble prediction of habitat suitability index (HSI) models for neon flying squid in central North Pacific 
by using 3-D ocean data assimilation product
Hiromichi Igarashi, Toshiyuki Awaji, Masafumi Kamachi, Yoichi Ishikawa, Norihisa Usui, Masaaki Iiyama, Yosuke Onoue,
Mitsuo Sakai, Yoshiki Kato, Irene Alabia, Sei-ichi Saitoh and Masaki Seitoh
--- PDF PAGE 8 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 8
Poster presentations
Developing the suitable operation prediction model of neon flying squid in the central North Pacific using Satellite images 
and VMS
Yang Liu, Sei-Ichi Saitoh, Hiroki Takegawa and Toru Hirawake
Effect of 3-D physical structures on spatial distributions of Japanese common squid in the coastal waters of southwestern 
Hokkaido, Japan
Xun Zhang, Sei-Ichi Saitoh, Toru Hirawake, Satoshi Nakada, Koji Koyamada, Toshiyuki Awaji, Yoichi Ishikawa and Hiromichi 
Igarashi
Habitat model development of Japanese common squid in Japan Sea using satellite remotely sensed data
Mariko Dehara, Sei-Ichi Saitoh and Toru Hirawake
Predicting the potential invasion in Korean waters of the saltmarsh grass Spartina alterniflora from China – A joint 
proposal by KIOST and Nanjing University
Keun-Hyung Choi and Changyong Wang
BIO/MEQ Topic Session (S3)
Tipping points: defining reference points for ecological indicators of multiple stressors in coastal and 
marine ecosystem
Co-sponsored by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) and Integrated Marine 
Biogeochemistry and Ecosystem Research (IMBER)
Co-Convenors: Rebecca G. Martone (USA), Ian Perry (Canada), Jameal Samhouri (USA), Motomitsu
Takahashi (Japan), Maciej Tomczak (Poland / ICES), Chang Ik Zhang (Korea)
Invited Speakers:
Phil Levin (NNOAANW Fisheries Science Center, USA)
Tetsuo Yanagi (Research Institute for Applied Mechanics, Kyushu University, Japan)
Background
Many coastal and marine ecosystems, ranging from reefs to estuaries to pelagic systems, are exposed to
multiple stressors,which canlead to rapid changeswith significant, long-termconsequencesthat are often difficult
to reverse. Changes in ocean climate, the abundance of key species, nutrients, and other factors drive these
shifts, which affect ocean food webs, habitats, and ecosystem functions and people’s livelihoods and well￾being. Determining indicators of ecological changes due to multiple stressors and defining reference points
for those indicators are key steps for managers to avoid ecological degradation and loss of keys goods and
services. Setting ecological reference points in ecological systems presents a challenge to resource managers
because (a) reference points are often difficult to determine due to the complexity of natural systems, including
the presence of thresholds, tipping points, and non-linearities; (b) the paucity of theoretical modeling and
empirical understanding needed to address these complexities, identify ecological thresholds and develop
early warning indicators means that managers must make decisions based on high levels of uncertainty; and,
(c) many institutional and governance structures do not allow managers the necessary flexibility to take up
this information and react within relevant timeframes. The aim of this session was to address these pressing
challenges, and explore promising approaches to tackling them with the goal of catalyzing new research
and management innovation. In particular, the convenors sought presentations that (i) define the
conceptual basis for reference points and management objectives surrounding reference points; (ii) use 
theoretical, modeling and observational approaches to identify potential reference points for indicators of
changes in marine ecosystems; (iii) incorporate risk and sources of error (measurement, model, process) in such
analyses; (iv) discuss how reference points may be used in helping to manage marine ecosystems, specifically
in relation to the decision-making process related to evaluating and deciding on acceptable levels of risk.
Discussions were guided by the FUTURE science themes, with special attention to examining climate and
anthropogenic drivers of ecological change, and identifying early warning indicators to enable forecasting
--- PDF PAGE 9 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 9
to avoid crossing ecological thresholds. The outcomes are expected to contribute to the work of PICES
Working Group 28 on Development of Ecosystem Indicators to Characterize Ecosystem Responses to Multiple
Stressors.
Summary of presentations
The session provided a very interesting overview of how tipping points pertain to marine species and 
ecosystems. It was well-attended and there was a great diversity of presentations, featuring many different 
geographies and at many different scales – from ecosystem-wide changes in response to tipping points to 
threshold responses of individual animals and fisheries stocks.
In his Invited Presentation, Dr. Phillip Levin addressed the important topic of how to respond to regime shifts 
in social-ecological systems. He focused on the importance of integrated ecosystem assessments (IEAs), and 
how they can be applied to counteract regime shifts. He suggested that the first question to answer as part of an 
IEA is whether the existing regime is desired, and then further broke this question down into 3 parts. First, do 
people see the world the same way? Dr. Levin illustrated that people do not necessarily view the world the 
same way using a folk taxonomy example, and suggested that regime shifts are likely not to be perceived the 
same way either. Second, Dr. Levin posed the question: does anyone care if a regime shifts? Using the 
example of regime shifts from kelp forests to sea urchin barrens and back again, he illustrated how different 
groups of people are likely to have different preferences for each regime. The third question Dr. Levin 
addressed focused on defining the target regime. Via the lens of eelgrass restoration, Dr. Levin described a 
novel approach for determining public preferences for different ecosystem configurations. Overall, he argued 
that portfolios of indicators need to be accompanied by portfolios of reference points that reflect people’s 
preferences for alternative ecosystem configurations.
Dr. Jake Rice asserted that the one thing managers should avoid is to make a tipping point a target. This 
argument stems from the fact that rapid changes in the ecosystem happen near tipping points, and those 
changes may not be desirable. However, Dr. Rice showed that identifying tipping points is analytically 
challenging. Nonetheless, he made a strong case for managers to: avoid tipping points with high probability, 
emphasize that objective even more so than an objective of achieving targets, and avoid optimizing along a 
single ecosystem dimension (e.g., a single fishery).
Dr. Rebecca Martone provided an overview of a multi-institutional collaborative project called “Ocean 
Tipping Points.” The project includes scientists and lawyers from universities, government agencies, and 
NGOs and consists of synthesis and application components. The synthesis component includes compilation of 
a global database of marine ecosystem shifts (n > 100 studies, few from the western Pacific), a meta-analysis 
of nonlinear relationships in pelagic systems, a law review that demonstrated that regulations incorporating 
thresholds yield better environmental outcomes, and a management review of 50 case studies of current 
management contexts showing that explicit use of tipping points in management yields improved 
environmental outcomes. The application components focus on coral reefs in Hawaii, USA, and the herring 
food web in Haida Gwaii, BC, Canada.
Dr. Maciej Tomczak described an impressive body of work showing that overexploitation, changes in climate, 
and nutrient loading combined to cause a shift from a cod-dominated to a sprat-dominated Baltic ecosystem. 
Dr Tomczak defined this phenomenon as a regime shift, i.e., a food web reorganization and redirection of 
energy flow pathways. He used a network indicator called Redundancy to suggest that resilience has declined 
in the Baltic over time, in response to an overall forcing index (inclusive of changes in climate, fishing, etc.). 
Dr. Takahashi and colleagues presented the results from an expert judgment survey to determine relative risks 
of coastal and marine habitats in the Eastern, Central and Western Regions of the Seto Inland Sea. Results 
indicate regional variation within the Seto Inland Sea to a suite of stressors. Coastal engineering and 
development affects strongly all ecosystems across the regions. Commercial activities, including fishing, have 
stronger impacts in the eastern waters. Nutrient input and HABs have higher risk in the central and eastern 
--- PDF PAGE 10 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 10
areas. Dr. Takahashi presented spatially explicit temporal data that corroborate many of the outcomes from the 
expert judgment survey. For example, tidal flats and seagrass beds have decreased in areas of the Seto Inland 
Sea. Stressor-specific risk scores indicate regional variability linked to population density and geographical 
features in the Seto Inland Sea. Future comparisons with results from global models and other regional models 
will help identify gaps and biases in expert judgement. These results can help identify priorities for research 
and management of cumulative impacts to ecosystems at regional spatial scales. 
Dr. Ian Perry presented work in the Salish Sea examining the drivers of change acting on the Strait of Georgia 
in the Salish Sea, British Columbia. Using redundancy analysis, Dr. Perry identified regime-like transitions of 
the Strait of Georgia since 1970. Dr. Perry then presented an examination of potential predictors for typical 
system behaviours prior to significant shifts in the system, including variance, autocorrelation at lag-1, and 
conditional heteroskedasticity. Standard deviation and the autocorrelation are not correlated with the regime 
shifts and thus do not act as good predictors. Interestingly, conditional hetero-skedasticity of SST and North 
Pacific Gyre Oscillation within the moving window of 37 months was well-correlated with the regime shift 
and possibly could be used as an early warning indicator. Dr. Perry described some of the challenges 
associated with choosing which indicators, which predictors for early warnings of regime shifts, choice of time 
period (e.g., moving windows), and how to identify significance. Early warning indicators appear promising, 
but the real world is more messy than simulated data. Several indicators are likely necessary, particularly lower 
trophic level biological variables, and combining these in a probability approach might be good way forward. 
Dr. Bill Sydeman focused on the importance of understanding how changes in community structure relate to 
changes in ecosystem functions and processes, with emphasis on tipping points of mid-trophic level 
invertebrates and fishes and meso-predators. Meso-predators may serve as indicators of variability in 
ecosystem function as they may be the most responsive to the forage fish community variability. Dr. Sydeman 
showed that there are many non-linear responses of ecosystems to changes in mid trophic level (MTL) fish, 
(e.g., changes in breeding success of seabirds) and that shapes of the relationships can be used to determine 
which indicators might be more sensitive to ecosystem changes. The global model for seabird breeding success 
indicates a threshold that around the mean long-term trend. Dr. Sydeman then explored whether there is 
variability in the threshold numerical response between forage fish abundance and seabirds, either among 
predator species, prey species or the parameter examined. Interestingly, among some predator and prey species 
the threshold holds but for other species there are different relationships, but despite this variation North 
Pacific seabird threshold range is similar to the global model. Furthermore, the threshold tends to hold for 
different parameters; however, there is high uncertainty associated with this because of data limitations. 
Ultimately, predator-prey threshold relationships may provide insight to ecosystem state shifts. Future work on 
population-level responses, multi-species predator–prey numerical responses, and how differences in mean 
abundance or life history characteristics (e.g., diet specialization) might affect the threshold, will be useful to 
understand threshold responses in ecosystem indicators.
Dr. Wen Yu presented on the effects of acute gamma radiation on the survival and physiological indices of the 
Chinese black sleeper. Existing studies from UNSCEAR (2008) indicate that fish are the most sensitive species 
based on LD50 reference points but few focus on data from marine fish and there are no data in China. By 
examining the Chinese black sleeper, Dr. Yu’s study fills important gaps in our understanding of the response 
of marine species to radiation, particularly as it may be more susceptible to pollution and is economically 
important. Dr. Yu presented the results of a dose-response experiment that examined 5 irradiated groups and a 
control groups, with 60 individuals per group. Preliminary results indicate that with the 3 higher levels of 
irradiation, 100% mortality occurred within a few days, while the lowest level of radiation was similar to the 
controls. The calculated LD50 was 7.1 (6.3–7.9) Gy, which is lower than the 10–25 Gy summarized from 
UNSCEAR. Future research will include additional experiments to confirm these results, along with research
on other local species and tests of the effects of chronic radiation.
Mr. Kyung-Su Kim described his research on the combined effects of elevated CO2 and temperature on the 
physiological conditions of olive flounder larvae, Paralichthys olivaceus. Using a MFC controller and mixing 
chambers Mr. Kim described the experimental settings, including 3 different CO2 concentrations, based on 
--- PDF PAGE 11 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 11
current day 2100 mild and strong emissions based on IPCC predictions and 2 temperatures, optimum and high 
temperature. Both total length and wet weight increased with CO2 at lower temperatures, but variable 
responses occurred when CO2 was combined higher temperatures. Skeleton malformation occurred more 
frequently with higher CO2 conditions, and bone density decreased with increasing CO2 conditions. Results 
from histomorphology did not show any malformation in tissues under higher CO2 conditions. Dr. Kim’s study 
illustrated that CO2 and temperature have variable interactive effects on growth (positive) and bone density 
(negative), suggest that these types of studies are necessary to tease apart the multiple effects of stressors on 
condition, which may have implications for population dynamics and ecosystems.
For his invited presentation Dr. Tetsuo Yanagi described eutrophic and oligotrophic processes in the Seto 
Inland Sea and their relation to the Satoumi concept. Eutrophication (TN:TP) in recent years has decreased in 
the Seto Inland Sea and fish stocks have also seen similar declines, suggesting regime shifts related to changes 
in productivity driven by nutrient inputs. Dr. Yanagi explored models of phytoplankton population dynamics 
using relationships with different strengths of non-linearity for a variety of parameters. The relation between 
fish catch and nutrient concentration is non linear and there is hysteresis due to sediment pollution. 
Oligotrophic conditions may lead to changes in stratification and ability of fish to eat sinking phytoplankton, 
leading to hypoxia and possibly a new regime. Dr. Yanagi then suggested that there is a possibility to move 
from oligotrophic conditions back to eutrophic conditions with higher productivity, which is the preferred 
state, and introduced the Satoumi concept. The Satoumi concept developed by Dr. Yanagi supports the idea 
that coastal seas can have high biodiversity and productivity under human interactions, where both over and 
under- use can lead to low biodiversity and productivity. For example, decreases of eelgrass beds in the Seto 
Inland Sea led to decrease of fish catch by set nets, which in turn led local fishermen to create eelgrass beds. 
Now both eelgrass beds and fish catches by set nets are increasing. Currently Dr. Yanagi has a new project 
supported by the Ministry of the Environment to develop coastal management method to realize the sustainable 
coastal sea, in which physical, biological, social sciences, and governance will support integrated, community￾based management, to realize clean, rich and prosperous seas.
Dr. Kazumi Wakita presented research on the diversity of perceptions and utility of marine ecosystem services. 
With an online survey of 1100 residents of japan, Dr. Wakita examined people’s perceptions of different 
ecosystem services and the utility or satisfaction experienced by different people could be used as a basis for 
decision making. In addition, she explored the how utility that residents derive from marine ecosystem services 
affect their behavioural intentions for marine conservation, assuming that where there is higher the perceived 
indispensability, the greater the utility, and the higher the indispensability the greater its influence on 
enhancing behavioural intensions for marine conservation. Using factor analysis and structural equation 
modeling to determine the causal relationships between perceived value and their intensions of behaviour for 
conservation of marine biodiversity, Dr. Wakita uncovered 3 hidden factors including (1) Essential Benefits, 
including food, life satisfaction, health, etc.; (2) Indirect Benefits, which was primarily composed of 
provisioning services and regulating services; and, (3) Cultural Benefits. Dr. Wakita found that cultural 
benefits were most important in driving behavioural intentions for marine conservation. Essential benefits also 
contributed to behaviour assessments, whereas indirect benefits were not significant. Essential benefits had 
highest indispensability, followed by indirect benefits, while cultural benefits scored lower on indispensability. 
These results indicate that indispensability does not correlate with conservation behaviors. Focusing on the 
landlocked Nagano residents, Dr. Wakita also performed factor analysis to examine the scarcity principle. The 
same 3 factors were identified, but their contents were different. Perception of marine ecosystem could vary 
reflecting scarcity of the services in their place of residents, which will be different for different communities. 
Dr. Wakita’s talk emphasizes the need for more attention for cultural aspects of marine ecosystem services.
Dr. Christopher Aura assessed the magnitude and interrelationships of seasonal phytoplankton bloom 
occurrence at the Japanese scallop farming area of Okhotsk Sea, Hokkaido Japan. To define tipping points, Dr. 
Aura and colleagues defined different bloom types, including the spring bloom, ice bloom, and open water 
bloom, using time series data sources including chla, sea ice, surface wind stress. By identifying the 
mechanism of bloom occurrence, Dr. Aura was able to identify that a decline of wind stress leads to increased 
ice edge blooming and decreased open water bloom variability. In addition, using PCA and Pearson correlation 
--- PDF PAGE 12 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 12
matrices, he found that there are distinct relationships between scallop landings, sea ice cover, and bloom 
variability. Where there is a strong negative relationship between sea ice days and open water bloom, while 
open water blooms are positively correlated with scallop landings. Thus, tipping points can be described by 
wind stress and solar radiation.
Dr. Jameal Samhouri and colleagues explore what has happened once a tipping point has been crossed, where 
multiple pressures shift systems over ecological thresholds and lead to different ecosystem states.. Dr. 
Samhouri described how examining systems that have crossed tipping points may help guide the recovery of 
ecosystems, specifically working toward the development of theory to reassemble marine systems. Dr. 
Samhouri examined what types of ecosystem reassembly strategies are currently in use, what strategies are 
likely to be the most effective using a theoretical model, and finally, determined if and where the most 
effective strategies that have been identified from models are being used. Dr. Samhouri identified three main 
reassembly strategies, where lower trophic levels recover first, higher trophic levels recover first, or 
simultaneous recovery occurs. Using a theoretical toy model of a generalist predator and multiple prey species, 
Dr. Samhouri asked whether who goes first matters in terms of ecosystem reassembly, specifically examining 
these three strategies. Simultaneous recovery (to equilibrium) of both predator and prey is fastest while 
predator first is the slowest, but predator first is the most direct in terms of amplification volume, without noisy 
transient dynamics. From the literature, the least common strategy is where highest trophic level recovery first, 
suggesting that the most effective strategies, specifically simultaneous reassembly and lower trophic level first, 
are the most common. Additional future work examining stochastic dynamics and multiple trophic levels in the 
system may help identify how regimes shift and the possibility of priority effects under more realistic 
scenarios.
Dr. Kulik presented work examining potential reference points for mean trophic level of macrofauna in the Sea 
of Okhotsk. Trophic level, a common indicator of fisheries status, can be determined by stable isotope ratio of 
nitrogen, but this depends both on seasonal delivery of nitrogen with spring blooms and on the age of the 
consumer. To address this variability, Dr. Kulik used an adjusted mean weighted average trophic level (muTL) 
of every catch, using information on weight at length from fishery data and stable isotope ratio information 
from data of species in the benthic-pelagic zone. Using trophic level of 67 fish, 6 squid and 5 decapod species 
and 148 species from Fishbase, Dr. Kulik and colleagues estimated muTL from 9926 trawls in pelagic waters 
from 1984–2013 and from 6321 bottom trawls from 1977–2010. Dr. Kulik examined spatial and temporal 
variation of muTL using Generalized Additive Models with splines for coordinates, horizon of trawling, years 
and months. Dr. Kulik’s results indicate that there is deviation from the global mean of muTL in pelagic waters 
over time in the Sea of Okhotsk, and during the period of 2003–2013, he estimated that the linear rate of 
increase in muTL of catches was 0.007 per year. Spatial variation also occurs in muTL, with deeper pelagic 
waters showing lower than average muTL in the pelagic fisheries, but for bottom trawls, the deeper pelagic 
waters demonstrate higher than average muTL. This research illustrates the need to understand spatial and 
temporal variation in reference points of indicators in order to understand ecosystem shifts.
Dr. Yusheng Zhang and colleagues described the fate and potential impacts from radionuclides in the NW 
Pacific following the Fukushima Nuclear Disaster (FND). Transfer of radionuclides can occur from water to 
fish through the food web and directly through contact with water. On a series of cruises beginning in June 
2011, Dr. Zhang and colleagues collected tissue samples from 3 species - squid, saury, and dolphin fish. They 
used these samples to analyze radionuclide concentrations of 134Cs, 137Cs, and 110mAg, using the gamma 
spectrometry method. All radionuclides were detected in all 3 collected species of marine animals, including 
134Cs and 110mAg, which are important indicators of nuclear accident pollution and aren’t usually seen. Squid 
showed higher concentrations than saury and dolphinfish, though radionuclide contents varied among tissue 
types. Dr. Zhang also developed spatial maps of exposure, indicating where the nuclide samples were found 
and their magnitudes, and examined temporal patterns in radionuclide concentrations in tissues. Concentrations 
of most radionuclides in squid peaked in November 2011, and dropped precipitously, except for 90Sr, which 
showed a very different temporal pattern. Dolphin fish radionuclide concentrations also exhibited declines over 
time. Dr. Zhang indicated that though radionuclide concentrations in marine animals increased following FND, 
they were lower than the limit reference point for seafood safety.
--- PDF PAGE 13 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 13
Dr. Hyeong-gi Kim presented work regarding thermal influence on nematodes, the most numerous metazoans 
worldwide and a potentially informative indicator group because of their abundance, occurrence in a wide 
range of habitats, habitat specificity, and a broad range of feeding types and generation times. Dr. Kim focused 
on the effects of thermal discharge from nuclear power plants on nematode communities in the southeastern 
coastal waters of Korea off Gori. The nematode community consisted of 6 dominant species, but a much larger 
number of species were extremely rare. Most nematodes were non-selective deposit feeders, and sediment type 
was a dominant factor determining nematode community composition. Interestingly, bottom temperature was 
not significantly correlated with the abundance of most nematodes.
Mr. Delvan Neville from Oregon State University discussed reference points in the context of radioecology. In 
this field, reference points are referred to as Derived Consideration Reference Level. Mr. Neville determined 
distribution of radionucleotides in the bodies of several Northern California Current marine species including 
Thunnus aluluna (albacore tuna). Concentrations were generally low, such that only a 10,000-fold increase in 
137Cs would exceed safe limits. Pink shrimp and several other species exhibited much larger responses than 
those seen in tuna. 
Some overall comments: 
▪ Tipping points are an integrative concept for social-ecological systems and pertain to many issues of 
strong interest to PICES, including climatic shifts, changes in top predator abundances, ecosystem 
responses to multiple pressures, and more. 
▪ However, a clear definition is challenged by this same feature. It seemed that the implicit and most general 
definition that emerged in S3 focused on the existence of a nonlinear change in a dynamical system. 
Defined this way, tipping points can occur in individual animals in response to environmental challenges 
(eg, radiation, CO2), to harvested fish stocks because of spawner-recruit relationships, and to entire food 
webs and ecological communities because of nonlinear predator-prey and competitive interactions.
▪ Early warning indicators of tipping points may be difficult to identify and anticipating or forecasting 
tipping points may not be possible. However, retrospective analysis and modeling can illustrate general 
lessons and rules of thumb, as well as help identify potential trajectories of recovery and guide 
management actions.
▪ Tipping points are inherent to social-ecological systems, but do not in and of themselves tell us anything 
about objectives and targets. Rather, knowledge of tipping points can help guide decisions about 
objectives and targets.
▪ While desired states of the social ecological system are important to consider for decision making, it is the 
biophysical system that defines what states are possible. Thus while it is important to define desired states 
within the tipping points framework, it is important to manage expectations about what is possible to 
achieve.
We are seeing an increasing amount of integration of social-ecological effects within ecosystems PICES 
activities across the North Pacific. This is a good sign for the FUTURE program.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Marine ecosystem regime shifts: Challenges and opportunities for Ecosystem-Based Management (Invited)
Phil Levin
Tipping points and decision-making: Why they matter, why they are hard, and practical things to do
Jake Rice
Embedding the science of tipping points into ocean management
Rebecca Martone, Carrie Kappel, Courtney Scarborough, Mary Hunsicker, Ben Halpern, Kimberly Selkoe, Phil Levin, Jameal F.
Samhouri, Crow White, Ashley Erickson, Ryan Kelly, Lindley Mease, Margaret Caldwell, Larry Crowder and Rod Fujita
Ecological network indicators of ecosystem status and change in the Baltic Sea
Maciej T. Tomczak, Johanna J. Heymans, Johanna Yletyinen, Susa Niiranen, Saskia A. Otto and Thorsten Blenckner
--- PDF PAGE 14 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 14
Regional variations in ecosystem responses to anthropogenic activities and natural stressors in the Seto Inland Sea
Motomitsu Takahashi, Sachihiko Itoh, Naoki Yoshie and Kazuhiko Mochida
Potential early warning indicators of marine ecosystem changes in coastal British Columbia, Canada
R. Ian Perry
Seabird indicators and “tipping points” in North Pacific marine ecosystems
William J. Sydeman, Sarah Ann Thompson, Julie A. Thayer, Marisol Garcia-Reyes, Heather Renner, John F. Piatt,
Stephanie Zador and Yutaka Watanuki
The effects of acute gamma irradiation on the survival and the physiological and biochemical indexes of Chinese black 
sleeper, Bostrichthys sinensis
Wen Yu, Tao Yu, Yusheng Zhang and Feng Lin
The combined effects of elevated CO2 and temperature on the physiological condition of the olive flounder larvae
Paralichthys olivaceus
Kyung-Su Kim, JeongHee Shim and Suam Kim 
Eutrophication and oligotrophication processes in the Seto Inland Sea and their relationships to the Satoumi concept 
(Invited)
Tetsuo Yanagi
Diversity of perceptions and utility of marine ecosystem services
Kazumi Wakita, Zhonghua Shen, Taro Oishi, Nobuyuki Yagi, Hisashi Kurokura and Ken Furuya
Assessment of the magnitude and interrelationship of seasonal phytoplankton bloom occurrence at the Japanese scallop 
(Mizuhopecten yessoensis) farming area of Okhotsk Sea, Hokkaido, Japan
Christopher Mulanda Aura, Sei-Ichi Saitoh, Yang Liu and Toru Hirawake
Ordered re-assembly of marine ecosystems
Jameal F. Samhouri, Adrian C. Stier and Phil Levin
Potential reference points for mean trophic level of macrofauna in the Sea of Okhotsk
Konstantin M. Gorbatenko, Vladimir V. Kulik and Artem E. Lazshentsev 
The bioconcentration of artificial radionuclides by marine animals after the Fukushima nuclear accident in the Northwest 
Pacific
Wu Men, Jianhua He, Wen Yu, Fenfen Wang, Wuhui Lin and Yusheng Zhang
Seasonal and spatial variations in nematode assemblages affected by thermal influence of a nuclear power plant in Korea 
(East Sea, Pacific Ocean)
Hyeong-gi Kim, Hyun soo Rho and Chul-woong Oh
Characterization of absorbed dose from natural and anthropogenic radionuclides for the purpose of establishing 
reference points within the marine environment
Delvan R. Neville and Kathryn A. Higley
Poster presentations
DNA damage (Comet Assay) as biomarker of Cd exposure in bivalve mollusks Modiolus kurilensi and Corbicula japonica
Valentina V. Slobodskova, Sergey P. Kukla, Viktor P. Chelomin and Elena V. Zhuravel
Sulfonamide antibiotics in the Northern yellow Sea are related to resistant bacteria: Implications for antibiotic 
resistance genes
Guangshui Na, Hui Gao, Ruijin Li, Jinqiu Du, Ziwei Yao and Chuanlin Huo
Growth rate comparison of Pacific oyster, Crassostrea gigas, reared in situ in a high-CO2 mesocosm environment
JeongHee Shim, Hakbin Hwang, Jae-Hyun Lim, Sang-Jun Lee and Jung-no Kwon
Valuation of ecosystem diversity maintenance service in marine protected areas: Shandong case
Shang Chen, Shengjie Tu, Tao Xia, Zhengxiang Gao and Tao Zhang
--- PDF PAGE 15 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 15
BIO/MONITOR/TCODE Topic Session (S4)
Use of long time series of plankton to inform decisions in management and policy concerning climate,
ecosystems and fisheries
Co-Convenors: David Checkley (USA), Sanae Chiba (Japan)
Invited Speakers:
Martin Lindegren (DTU National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Denmark)
Abigail McQuatters-Gollop (SAHFOS, UK)
Background
Plankton plays key roles in the pelagic ocean. Planktonic plants, invertebrates and the early developmental 
stages of vertebrates are important for trophic and population dynamics of exploited protected species; the flux 
of energy and material, including carbon; and as indicators of ecosystem status. Phytoplankton has been both 
sampled in situ and observed remotely, from satellites. Zooplankton has been collected by nets. Increasingly, 
optics, acoustics, and ‘omics’ are used. Sampling programs worldwide now span decades, often with ancillary 
data. From these, time series of plankton abundance have been created, with varying levels of taxonomic and 
geographic resolution. Often, such programs have been in support of fisheries management. Increasingly, 
however, they are also relevant to management and policy decisions affecting ecosystems and climate. In turn, 
such programs require justification for their continuation. Examples include the California Cooperative 
Oceanic Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI), the Global Alliance of Continuous Plankton Recorder Surveys 
(GACS), and many other plankton sampling programs worldwide. The objective of this session was to learn 
how time series of plankton have been, are being, and might be used to inform decisions in management and 
policy concerning climate, ecosystems, and fisheries. Presentations were invited on both time-tested uses of 
plankton time series and on novel, untested uses.
Summary of presentations
Despite of being scheduled on the last day of the symposium, this session attracted a good audience of persons 
who shared the common interests in future continuity of plankton monitoring and effective use of plankton 
time series in policymaking for societal benefits. The presentation topics covered time series observations in 
Canada, Japan, Korea, USA and the North Atlantic although we unfortunately missed papers from China and 
Russia. As “Communication” is the one of the keywords of PICES FUTURE, we hope this session gave 
insight into effective strategies for better communication between the PICES scientists and policy makers.
The invited speaker, Dr. Martin Lindegren and collaborators, reported the study on the complex mechanisms 
through which climate forcing affects tropic control (bottom-up, top-down or wasp-waist) of the food-web 
dynamics in the Southern California Current System (SCCS) using CalCOFI and fisheries data. They found 
that bottom-up control and climate forcing are the predominant modes of regulation, with interacting top-down 
effects asserting a regulatory role only during periods of limiting resources and/or unfavorable climate 
conditions in the SCCS. Their study indicated the usefulness of long-term efforts to monitor multiple biotic 
variables to provide a holistic view to study for climate forcing and trophic interactions, processes that are 
indispensable for the sustainable and ecosystem-based management of living marine resources.
The invited speaker, Dr. Abigail McQuatters-Gollop, reported accomplishments of over the 70 years of basin￾scale monitoring with the Continuous Plankton Recorder (CPR) led by the Sir Alister Hardy Foundation for 
Ocean Science (SAHFOS) in the North Atlantic. The NA CPR survey has revealed the biomass and functional 
changes in the plankton community in response to climate forcing and human activities. She introduced 
SAHFOS’s strategies for communication with policy makers to convey the importance of the long-term marine 
ecosystem monitoring for fisheries and climate change management, and the usefulness of the ecosystem index 
as a tool for such the communication.
--- PDF PAGE 16 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 16
The talk of Dr. Sanae Chiba focused on the current problems in future continuity of plankton monitoring 
programs in Japan. She reported on presentations and discussions at the international workshop “Toward the 
Better Collaboration between Scientists and Policy Makers”, which was held in Tokyo and aimed to defined 
the major obstacles in continuing the present monitoring and seek a better strategy to facilitate collaboration 
between scientists and policy makers to promote ocean research. Although Japan has extensive networks of 
biological monitoring conducted by the Fisheries Research Agency and others, many of those programs are 
facing financial issues. She pointed out the need for time- and cost-effective methods of monitoring and 
analysis, e.g., bench-top VPR and CPR, and for increasing awareness of the importance of plankton time series 
to policy makers and public.
Dr. Anthony Koslow and Ms. Melaina Wright proposed the abundance of ichthyoplankton taxa as an Essential 
Ocean Variable (EOV) to be observed globally. EOVs are being considered by the Global Ocean Observing 
System (GOOS), based on recommendations in the Framework for Ocean Observing, the product of a working 
group following Ocean Obs’09. Fish communities are a highly valued component of marine ecosystems and 
are sensitive to natural environmental variability and a range of human stressors: overfishing, habitat loss, 
pollution and eutrophication, and potentially ocean acidification and deoxygenation. To test whether limited 
collections of ichthyoplankton adequately capture trends in larval fish abundance, the authors sub-sampled 
CalCOFI data. Time series based on a transect of stations often elucidated significant trends of 
ichthyoplankton seen in the complete CalCOFI data set.
Dr. Soonmi Lee and her collaborators presented a modeling study of phytoplankton variability in Korean 
waters, with particular focus on atmospheric nitrogen deposition and its effects on phytoplankton composition. 
They found that the combined effects of reduction in the vertical water mixing and increase in the atmospheric 
nitrogen would result in the relative increase in smaller phytoplankton although influence of the former is 
greater. This implies that the ongoing warming trend and increase of atmospheric nitrogen deposition due to 
the human activities in the continental East Asia might result in a change in phytoplankton assemblage 
structure in the Korean waters.
Dr. Sonia Batten reported on the North Pacific CPR survey, which started in 2000. She introduced the effective 
strategies needed to transition from newly started plankton time series to an established long-term program, 
such as the timely, quick and regular publication of observation results, even when there are only a few years 
of data, and use of the consortium framework to secure research partnerships and funding. Globalization is 
another key to demonstrate the importance of plankton time series. International CPR community established 
the global network, Global Alliance of CPR Survey (GACS) in 2011, enabling the global comparison of 
marine ecosystem variability. She also reported the new technologies and tools that add value to the 
conventional CPR survey, e.g., a temperature sensor on the CPR and molecular-level analysis of sampled 
plankton.
Dr. Harold Batchelder presented on n behalf of Dr. William Peterson, who could not attend the meeting. Dr. 
Batchelder described the 20-y Newport Line zooplankton time series off Oregon and how that study has been 
used successfully to observe interannual variation of the ecological states and in regional fisheries 
management. Dr. Peterson and others developed a matrix of the annual scores of multiple climate, physical and 
biological indicators, with which interannual variations in the “good” and “bad” years for salmon catch are 
easily visible. This matrix was found useful for managers and policy makers to learn the importance of 
studying basin-scale mechanisms in order to understand variability of regional fisheries. Meanwhile, the 
uncertain future of research time series may still lead to reluctance by managers to rely on them for the long 
term.
Dr. Ian Perry and his collaborators reported on long-term monitoring of zooplankton off the coast of British 
Columbia, Canada. The Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) has been collecting biological 
oceanographic samples as part of various historical and ongoing monitoring programs off the west coast of 
British Columbia, Canada since the late 1970s. The Zooplankton Database was developed at the Institute of 
Ocean Sciences in 1997. It has grown to include samples back to 1957 (Sta. P weather ship) and contains 
--- PDF PAGE 17 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 17
information such as life stages and size classes, uncommon elsewhere and useful for models of predator-prey 
interactions that use size-based approaches. The Zooplankton Database has enabled summaries used regularly 
in DFO activities, including the State of the Ocean reviews, salmon survival dynamics, and indicators of 
ecosystem conditions.
Dr. David Checkley focused on the value, challenges and possible solutions of maintaining continuity of 
plankton time series, and gave overall comments on the session. The value of many plankton time series was 
initially for fisheries management but evolved over time for observing long-term variation of marine 
ecosystems associated with fishing and climate. Challenges include flat budgets, competing demands for 
funds, and increasing costs of sample collection and analysis. Possible solutions include increases in efficiency 
of sample collection and analysis, using advanced technologies, and increased funding from both governments 
and users in light of the increasing value of plankton time series to inform management and policy decisions. 
A highlight of the session was a focus on the value of communicating results to users, including decision 
makers and the general public. Ultimately, plankton time series serve societal needs and thus their value must 
be clear and compelling to all users.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Climate variability and Interacting Trophic Control in the Southern California Current (Invited)
Martin Lindegren, David M. Checkley,Jr., Mark D. Ohman,J.Anthony Koslow and Ralf Goericke
Big YES to sustainable ecosystem management and why NO to sustainable monitoring efforts? – Gap between demand 
and supply in Japanese case
Sanae Chiba
Design of ocean observation systems: Sampling requirements to monitor fish population and community trends as 
Essential Ocean Variables
J. Anthony Koslow and Melaina Wright
Understanding the mechanisms of the interannual variability of phytoplankton in the Ulleung Basin, East Sea: A 
modeling study
Soonmi Lee, Sinjae Yoo, Chanjoo Jang and Momme Butenschon 
The role of plankton time-series in managing our seas in a climate of macroecological change (Invited)
Abigail McQuatters-Gollop
The North Pacific Continuous Plankton Recorder survey
Sonia Batten
How the 20 year Newport Line zooplankton time series is used to inform fisheries management
William Peterson, Jay Peterson, Jennifer Fisher and Cheryl Morgan (Harold Batchelder on behalf of William Peterson)
Long term zooplankton monitoring and database programs in British Columbia – Understanding the dynamics of a 
changing ocean
Moira Galbraith, David Mackas and R. Ian Perry
Taking stock
David M. Checkley, Jr.
--- PDF PAGE 18 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 18
FIS Topic Session (S5)
Ecosystem considerations in fishery management of cod and other important demersal species
Co-sponsored by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES)
Co-Convenors: Gordon H. Kruse (USA), Sukgeun Jung (Korea), Alexei Orlov (Russia), Xianshi Jin (China), 
Jacquelynne King (Canada), Kenneth Drinkwater (Norway / ICES)
Invited Speakers:
Kenneth Drinkwater (Institute of Marine Research, Norway)
Robyn Forrest (Pacific Biological Station, Canada)
Yasunori Sakurai (Hokkaido University, Japan)
Background
Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus) sustain important commercial fisheries throughout the North Pacific 
Ocean and, historically, Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) have supported some of the most valuable commercial 
fisheries in the North Atlantic Ocean. Their dynamics have been linked to fishing, climate and other 
commercially important demersal species. Cod are also extremely important ecologically. As predators, they 
have been implicated in the decline or lack of recovery of shrimp, king crab, capelin and herring. As prey, they 
are important forage for pinnipeds; some research implicates seal predation in the lack of recovery of some 
Atlantic cod stocks, and other studies implicate Pacific cod in the lack of recovery of Steller sea lions in the 
western Gulf of Alaska and Aleutian Islands. Multispecies models demonstrate co-variation of cod with other 
important demersal species, as well as explicit tradeoffs in cod and forage fish populations with implications 
on the joint setting of catch quotas. Moreover, cod recruitment and spatial distribution can be strongly 
influenced by climate-driven changes in oceanography on decadal and shorter time scales, implying that catch 
levels must be adjusted for bottom-up changes in productivity. For these and other reasons, ecosystem 
considerations must be taken into account in cod fishery management. By drawing upon insights gained from 
different systems, as well as from studies of other important co-occurring demersal species (e.g., walleye 
pollock, small yellow croaker), this session will deepen our understanding of the roles of cod in the marine 
ecosystem and their implications on fishery management. Contributions were sought that consider stock 
identification, stock assessment and population dynamics, effects of climatology and oceanography on 
recruitment and biomass, trophodynamics, movements and distribution with respect to oceanographic features, 
multispecies models and their implications on management strategies, and other ecosystem approaches to the 
management, including aquaculture alternatives. Presentations on marine ecosystems in the North Pacific and 
North Atlantic were welcomed.
Summary of presentations
During this session, 16 oral presentations were given; no posters were presented. Three invited speakers kicked 
off the session. The first invited talk was presented by Ken Drinkwater of ICES. He began his talk with a 
review of the relationships between Atlantic cod and gadid relatives in the North Pacific. Pacific cod and 
walleye pollock emerged as a result of migrations of Atlantic cod to the Pacific during a warm periods 3.5 and 
Myr ago, respectively. Ken went on to provide an extensive review of Atlantic cod throughout their range in 
the North Atlantic Ocean. He reviewed climate-related changes in cod distribution, as well as variable 
relationships of cod recruitment to temperature and spawning biomass with latitude.
The second invited talk was presented by Yasunori Sakurai, who provided an overview of decades of his 
research on reproductive characteristics and strategies of Pacific gadid fishes. Two reproductive modes were 
identified. Species, such as Atlantic cod and walleye pollock, produce separate pelagic eggs at intervals of a 
few days. Other species, such as Pacific cod and saffron cod, lay slightly adhesive demersal eggs in a single 
spawning event within a minute. Sakurai-san went on to discuss the importance of experimental studies on 
reproductive characteristics, including the need to examine reproductive strategies and early life stages under 
conditions experienced during climate regime shifts and global warming.
--- PDF PAGE 19 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 19
The final invited speaker, Robyn Forrest, reported on efforts to understand variability in Pacific cod catches in 
British Columbia, as well as fishery management strategies that are robust to uncertainties in these processes. 
A number of hypotheses have been proposed to explain cycles in cod catches, including environmental drivers, 
predator–prey cycles, and density-dependent survival. Recent analyses with updated datasets were unable to 
pinpoint the exact underlying mechanism(s), because of large historical changes in fishery management, 
difficulties in ageing, and uncertainties in abundance estimates. A management strategy evaluation explored
the tradeoffs of three alternative harvest control rules with respect to these uncertainties.
Contributed talks covered a wide range of topics from population-level processes to multispecies and 
ecosystem models. At the population-level Maria Rabchun discussed a genetic study of Pacific cod from six 
areas of the Sea of Okhotsk and Bering Sea using two genetic markers: mtDNA and the gene Cyt b. Two 
haplotypes of Cyt b were unique to samples collected in Tauiskaya Bay (northern Sea of Okhotsk) and the 
northern Kurils, whereas a control region of mtDNA revealed a haplotype that was unique to Tauiskaya Bay 
only and another haplotype that was specific to the Southern Kurils and northern Bering Sea. Nadezhda 
Aseeva reported on a comprehensive study of the parasites of Pacific cod, which affect their commercial value. 
The frequency of infestation and species diversity of parasites decrease with increasing latitude. Olga 
Novikova reviewed the fisheries for saffron cod in the Russian Far East. Commercial catches of saffron cod 
averaged 27.0 thousand tons during 2003–2013. More than two-thirds of the harvest is taken from the Sea of 
Okhotsk and western Bering Sea. The fishery is prosecuted Danish seine and trawls, as well as fixed net gear 
types.
Three contributed papers addressed various aspects of reproduction. Libby Logerwell presented two papers on 
behalf of her colleagues, Sandi Neidetcher and Kimberly Rand. Sandi studied spawning phenology and 
geography of Pacific cod in the Aleutian Islands and eastern Bering Sea. Temporal and spatial analyses of 
visual maturity samples revealed that the spawning season spans late February to mid April and most spawning 
occurs between 100 and 200 m depth. Specific spawning concentrations were identified in the Aleutian and 
Pribilof Islands, as well as the shelf break near Zhemchug Canyon in the eastern Bering Sea. Kimberly 
analyzed the movements of cod that were tagged north of Unimak Island in the eastern Bering Sea and 
recovered by commercial fisheries. Results showed that cod are widely distributed across the eastern Bering 
Sea during summer and demonstrate homing tendencies during spawning migrations in late winter and early 
spring. Minkyoung Bang investigated relationships between water properties and biological characteristics of 
walleye pollock from the East Sea/Sea of Japan, a stock that collapsed in the 1990s and 2000s. Fish size 
decreased and gonadosomatic index (GSI) increased with warmer temperatures according to an alternating 
pattern of temperatures: warm phase in 1971–1980, cool phase in 1981–1987, warm in 1988–1993, and cool in 
1994–2003. Higher GSI during low abundance in the 2000s compared to high abundance in the 1970s and 
1980s provided some evidence of density-dependent effects.
A series of presentations examined effects of environment on gadids. Zhe Li received the FIS-committee’s best 
oral presentation award for his talk on effects of temperature and ontogeny on vertical movement of newly 
hatched Pacific cod larvae. Larval cod were reared at various temperatures in experimental columns in the 
laboratory during the initial 3 d post hatch period. Larvae swam upward in the column. Specific gravities of the 
larvae generally did not change over the initial 3 d, but decreased with ontogenetic development. Results 
suggest that Pacific cod larvae maintain vertical position initially by upward swimming and thereafter by near￾neutral buoyancy.
Heeyong Kim discussed relationships between the Siberian High and formation of Yellow Sea bottom cold 
water (YSBCW). Pacific cod catches are lowest when YSBCW is restricted to the center of the Yellow Sea 
and highest when YSBCW covers the entire seafloor of the Yellow Sea. Sukgeun Jung demonstrated that 
climate regime shifts and subsequent ecological impacts can occur asynchronously between upper and deep 
layers of the ocean. Consistent with a sharp increase in temperature at 50–100 m in the Ulleung basin of the 
East Sea/Sea of Japan during 1987–1989, commercial catches of epipelagic species shifted from cold-water to 
warm-water species. On the other hand, cold bottom water intensified in 1992–1993 and was followed by a 
shift in benthopelagic species from warm-water to cold-water species.
--- PDF PAGE 20 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 20
Pat Livingston explored ecosystem factors responsible for synchrony in recruitment patterns of Pacific cod and 
walleye pollock in the eastern Bering Sea. Despite a comprehensive review of similarities and differences in 
life history, no single factor explains these patterns in recruitment. Mikhail Stepanenko considered factors 
responsible for good and poor recruitment of pollock in the Bering Sea. Strong year classes did not seem to 
occur during warm or cold periods, but rather during transitions between these two conditions. A connection 
between zooplankton and survival of young-of-the-year pollock was suggested. Rapid changes between warm 
and cold conditions and vice versa may be associated with increased diversity of zooplankton size groups, 
perhaps favoring feeding and survival. Franz Mueter gave a presentation for Elizabeth Siddon, which further 
explored relationships between pollock growth/survival and zooplankton. Modeling evidence was provided 
that a spatial mismatch between juvenile walleye pollock and growth ‘hot spots’ contribute to poor recruitment 
while a higher degree of overlap results in higher recruitment. Moreover, results indicated that climate-driven 
changes in prey quality and composition can impact growth of juvenile walleye pollock, potentially severely 
affecting recruitment variability.
Presentations were also given on ecosystem and multispecies modeling. Konstantin Gorbatenko developed a 
mass-balance food web model for the northeastern part of the Sea of Okhotsk. This large model involved 3994 
inequalities for 166 equations with 2034 flows. Although an exact solution could not be obtained, a least￾squares solution provided a basis for further investigation. The uncorrected food web model showed that 
aggregate flows to Pacific cod and walleye pollock are about 1.6% of primary production. Finally, Gordon 
Kruse gave a presentation on behalf of Tadayasu Uchiyama on a multispecies predator-prey model of major 
groundfish species, including Pacific cod and walleye pollock, in the eastern Bering Sea. Multispecies models 
were able to reconstruct patterns of major groundfishes revealed by trawl surveys. However, reference points, 
such as virgin biomass and MSY, estimated by multispecies models were lower than the sum of those 
estimates from single-species models. Temperature also affected the strength of predation. Model results 
supported the hypothesis that colder bottom temperatures provide a larger refuge to juvenile pollock from 
predators. Temperature effects were largest for arrowtooth flounder predation on age-1 pollock.
Excellent discussions were held after each half-day session. Participants recommended that a cross-basin and 
cross-ocean comparison of cod stocks may help elucidate underlying mechanisms (e.g., roles of temperature 
and fishing) on cod population dynamics. Interest was also expressed to conduct additional work on cod 
through the PICES FIS committee. Possibilities include the formation of a working group or the conduct of a 
workshop. The convenors will further explore these possibilities in the future. Finally, the convenors are 
exploring the possibility to publish papers from session S5 as a special journal issue. All participants agreed 
that this well-attended session was extremely successful.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Population dynamics of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) and the roles of climate and fishing (Invited)
Kenneth F. Drinkwater
Overview of reproductive characteristics and strategies among the Pacific gadid fishes (Invited)
Yasunori Sakurai
Searching for robust management procedures for Hecate Strait Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus): A data-limited stock 
with highly uncertain dynamics (Invited)
Robyn Forrest, Kendra Holt, Sean Cox and A. Rob Kronlund
Comparison of short-term and long-term climate changes on catch fluctuations of Pacific cod, Gadus macrocephalus, in 
the yellow Sea
Heeyong Kim and Daehyun Kim
Observations of seasonal movement of a single tag release group of Pacific cod in the eastern Bering Sea
Kimberly M. Rand, Elizabeth A. Logerwell, Peter Munro, Sandra K. Neidetcher and Daniel G. Nichol
Effects of water temperatures on the size and GSI variations of walleye pollock (Gadus chalcogrammus) in the East Sea
Minkyoung Bang, S. Kang, J.-H. Park and S. Kim
Spawning phenology and geography of Aleutian Islands and eastern Bering Sea Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus)
Sandra K. Neidetcher, Thomas P. Hurst, Lorenzo Ciannelli and Elizabeth A. Logerwell
--- PDF PAGE 21 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 21
Effects of temperature and ontogeny on vertical movement ability of newly hatched larvae of the Pacific cod Gadus 
macrocephalus
Zhe Li, Jun Yamamoto and Yasunori Sakurai
Review of the saffron cod Eleginus gracilis (Tilesius) fishery in the seas on Russian Far East
Оlga V. Novikova
Asynchronous responses of fish assemblages to climate-driven ocean regime shifts between the upper and deep layer in 
the Ulleung Basin of the East Sea from 1986 to 2010
Sukgeun Jung
Exploration of ecosystem factors responsible for coherent recruitment patterns of Pacific cod and walleye pollock in the 
eastern Bering Sea
Patricia A. Livingston, Kerim Aydin, James Ianelli and Grant Thompson
Molecular genetic study of the population structure as a basis for Pacific сod fishery management in the Russian Far East
Maria A. Rabchun, Svetlana Y. Orlova, Alexey M. Orlov and Nikolay S. Mugue 
An ecosystem-based assessment of the Bering Sea pollock recruitment and spatial distribution
Mikhail A. Stepanenko and Elena V. Gritsay
Spatial match-mismatch between juvenile walleye pollock (Gadus chalcogrammus) and zooplankton prey in the eastern 
Bering Sea may contribute to recruitment variability 
Elizabeth Calvert Siddon, Trond Kristiansen, Franz J. Mueter, Kirstin Holsman, Ron Heintz and Edward Farley
Carbon flows through Gadidae species in the ecosystem of the Northeastern part of the Sea of Okhotsk estimated in a 
carbon flow mass balance model
Konstantin M. Gorbatenko, Vladimir V. Kulik, Artem E. Lazshentsev, Alexander V. Zavolokin and Victor A. Nadtochy
Development of multispecies models to investigate predator-prey interactions and temperature mediated predation rates 
of Pacific cod and other groundfish in the eastern Bering Sea
Tadayasu Uchiyama, Gordon H. Kruse and Franz J. Mueter
Parasitology of Pacific cod
Nadezhda L. Aseeva
FIS/FUTURE Topic Session (S6)
Climate change impacts on spatial distributions of marine fish and shellfish
Co-Convenors: Anne Hollowed (USA), Sukyung Kang (Korea)
Invited Speaker: Elvira Poloczanska (CSIRP, Australia)
Background
Changes in fish and shellfish distributions are an important indicator of climate change and are being 
incorporated into national climate change assessment. However, fishing also affects fish and shellfish 
distributions and fishing effort is changing in many ecosystems. Changes in distributions will also affect 
fisheries, shifting the resource toward or away from fishing ports. Papers were invited that examined the 
combined effort of climate change and fishing on fish and shellfish distributions and the impact of these 
changes on fisheries. Specifically, papers were encouraged that 1) develop and use analytical approaches for 
separating the effect of fishing and climate, 2) evaluate life history and fishery traits that are associated with 
shifting distribution, and 3) examine the effect of shifting distributions on fisheries, fishing communities, 
resource economics, and international allocation.
Summary of presentations
The ½-day session was held on October 24 in Yeosu, Korea. The session was co-convened by Dr. Anne 
Hollowed (USA) and Dr. Sukyung Kang (Korea). A total of 13 presentations (9 orals and 4 posters) were 
made during the session. Anne Hollowed started the session with a brief introduction and objectives of this 
session, as well as future expectations.
--- PDF PAGE 22 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 22
An invited talk by Elvira Poloczanska reviewed the analyses of observed and projected shifts in marine life 
under climate change, and covered the global and regional maps of the expected direction and rate of shifts of 
climate migrants. Saldivar-Lucio presented the impacts of different climate temporal scales on the Pacific 
sardine life cycle. Matthew R. Baker discussed the projected climate impacts on the distribution and volume 
of marine ecoregions and implications for species interactions. Shin-ichi Ito reported global warming effects 
on Pacific saury. He used three-box ocean domain model for ocean environment and NEMURO.FISH model 
for ecosystem-based bioenergetics. James Christian presented results from 5th coupled model intercomparison 
project on albacore tuna habitat. Xiaozhe Pan used generalized additive model (GAM), generalized linear 
model (GLM) and Maximum entropy model (MaxEnt) to determine present distributions of yellowtail and 
used IPCC-SRES B1 scenario for future distribution. Fluctuations of the Greenland halibut stocks in the 
Okhotsk Sea under influence of circulation patterns change were reported by Nadezhda L. Aseeva. Gordon H. 
Kruse presented the temporal changes in spatial distribution of Bristol Bay red king crab in the eastern Bering 
Sea. Sukgeun Jung presented latitudinal shifts in the distribution of commercially important fish species in 
Korean waters under climate change.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Analyses of observed and projected shifts in marine life (Invited)
Elvira Poloczanska, Jorge García Molinos, Michael Burrows and the NCEAS marine biological impacts of climate change 
working group
Incorporating North Pacific climate signals in long-term fishery management
Romeo Saldívar-Lucio, Aida Martínez-López, Emanuele Di Lorenzo, Germán Ponce-Díaz, Jacquelynne King, Gordon
McFarlane, Christian Salvadeo, Daniel Lluch-Cota and José Alberto Zepeda-Domínguez
Projected climate impacts on the distribution and volume of marine ecoregions and implications for species interactions
Anne B. Hollowed, Matthew R. Baker, Albert Hermann and Kirstin Holsman
Global Change effects on Pacific saury distribution and its effects on fisheries
Shin-ichi Ito, Kosei Komatsu, Takeshi Okunishi, Akinori Takasuka, Naoki Yoshie, Takahiko Kameda, Sohsuke Ohno,
Kazuyoshi Watanabe, Takashi Setou and Hiroshi Kuroda
Expansion of albacore tuna habitat in the northeast Pacific Ocean under anthropogenic warming
James Christian and John Holmes
Predicting present and future distributions of yellowtail in the Japan Sea
Xiaozhe Pan, Sei-Ichi Saitoh and Yongjun Tian
Fluctuations of the greenland halibut stocks in the Okhotsk Sea under influence of circulation patterns change
Nadezhda L. Aseeva
Temporal changes in spatial distribution of Bristol Bay red king crab in the eastern Bering Sea and their implications for 
fisheries management
Jie Zheng, M.S.M. Siddeek and Gordon H. Kruse
Latitudinal shifts in the distribution of commercially important fish species in Korean waters during the last 30 years: A 
consequence of climate change
Sukgeun Jung, Ig-Chan Pang, Joon-ho Lee and Ilsu Choi
Poster presentations
Climate-change driven range shifts of anchovy biomass projected by bio-physical coupling individual based model in the 
marginal seas of East Asia
Sukgeun Jung, Ig-Chan Pang and Joon-ho Lee
The impacts of marine environment change on sustainable aquaculture model for Japanese scallop in southern Hokkaido 
and Aomori prefecture, Japan using RS/GIS and OGCM 
Yang Liu, Sei-Ichi Saitoh, Christopher Mulanda Aura and Toru Hirawake
Effect of global warming on the life history and population dynamics of Japanese chum salmon
Masahide Kaeriyama, Hyunju Seo, Yu-xue Qin and HyeSeon Kim
Changes in distribution and composition of major fish species in alternating pattern of warm and cool years in Korean 
waters
Sukyung Kang, Kwangho Choi, Jisuk Ahn, Jae Dong Hwang, Dong Woo Lee and Suam Kim
--- PDF PAGE 23 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 23
FIS/TCODE/FUTURE Topic Session (S7)
Recent assessments of climate change impacts on marine ecosystems
Co-sponsored by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) and Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC)
Co-Convenors: Anne Hollowed (USA), Sukgeun Jung (Korea), Hans-O. Pörtner (Germany), Jake Rice
(Canada / ICES)
Invited Speakers: 
Richard Feely (Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory NOAA, USA) 
Hans-O. Pörtner (Alfred-Wegener-Institute, Germany) 
Meryl J. Williams (AsiaPacific-FishWatch, Australia/Malasia)
Background
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) will release the full reports of Working Groups 1, 2 and
3 in 2014. Other organizations have recently completed similar assessment reports that focus on specific
geographic regions or fishing sectors. Collectively these reports will mark a major milestone by updating
our knowledge of the observed and projected implications of climate change on the earth. Of particular
interest to PICES and ICES will be the findings of the reports with respect to impacts on marine ecosystems.
This session encouraged presentations that summarize the key findings of the IPCC. It also encouraged talks
that will provide guidance and insight on future directions for climate change research within the ICES and 
PICES communities.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Ocean acidification: Trouble for ocean ecosystems (Invited)
Richard A. Feely, Simone Alin and Nina Bednarsek
Climate change impacts on the world’s oceans: A sectoral analysis by IPCC AR5 (Invited)
Hans-O. Pörtner
Fisheries of the North Pacific: Pathways to food security and nutrition (Invited)
Meryl J. Williams
The linkage between the yellow Sea algae bloom burst in 2008 and regional climate change
Hongjun Song on behalf of Fangli Qiao
North Pacific climate change impacts as projected by a suite of CMIP5 model output
Phoebe Woodworth-Jefcoats and Jeffrey J. Polovina
Top predators as indicators of climate change: Statistical techniques, challenges and opportunities
Elliott L. Hazen, Rob Suryan, Steven J. Bograd, Takashi Yamamoto, Emanuele Di Lorenzo, Jeff Polovina, William J. Sydeman,
Kevin Weng, Rolf Ream and Yutaka Watanuki
Decadal scale variation in phosphate concentration in the Oyashio and Kuroshi-Oayashio Transition waters, western 
North Pacific from 1955 to 2010
Kazuaki Tadokoro, Hiroshi Kuroda and Tsuneo Ono 
IPCC 5th Assessment Report WG 3 – Drivers, Trends, and Mitigation: Where is the ocean?
Jake Rice
Effects of climate change on marine ecosystems in Polar Regions
Anne B. Hollowed and Andrew Constable
Effects of Climate Change on Marine ecosystems and fishery resources in the Northwestern Pacific
Suam Kim
Plankton in a changing climate: Coastal and polar cases study
Hongjun Song and Rubao Ji
--- PDF PAGE 24 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 24
Chapter 30 the Ocean, Working Group II, IPCC fifth assessment report
Ove Hoegh-Guldberg, Rongshuo Cai, Elvira Poloczanska, Peter G. Brewer, Svein Sundby, Karim Hilmi, Victoria J. Fabry and
Sukgeun Jung
Assessment of climate trends and projections and their associated impacts on the Pacific coast of Canada
James Christian, Robin M. Brown, Michael Foreman, Karen Hunter and Kim Hyatt
Impacts of climate change on U.S. oceans and marine resources: Technical input to the third U.S. National Climate
Assessment
Roger B. Griffis, Jennifer Howard and Anne B. Hollowed
Vulnerability and adaptation strategies of pteropods due to ocean acidification and hypoxia
Nina Bednarsek, Richard A. Feely, J.C.P. Reum, B. Peterson, J. Menkel, S.R. Alin and B. Hales 
Poster presentations
Marine climate change impacts and adaptation report card for Australia
Elvira Poloczanska, Anthony J. Richardson and Alistair J. Hobday
Projecting impacts of rising water temperature on the distribution of seaweeds around Japan under warming scenarios
Shintaro Takao, Naoki Kumagai, Hiroya Yamano, Masahiko Fujii and Yasuhiro Yamanaka
North Pacific upper-ocean changes projected by CMIP5 models
Chan Joo Jang, Dongwon Yi, Jihyeon Lee, Ho-Jeong Shin and Yong Sun Kim
Changes of distributions and composition of nutrients in the Changjiang Estuary after the normal storage of Three 
Gorges Reservoir
Baodong Wang, Zicheng Wang, Ming Xin, Xia Sun, Qinsheng Wei and Bo Yang
MEQ Topic Session (S8)
Marine debris in the Ocean: Sources, transport, fate and effects of macro- and micro-plastics
Co-sponsored by the Group of Experts on Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution (GESAMP) the International 
Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) and the Northwest Pacific Action Plan (NOWPAP)
Co-Convenors: Won Joon Shim (Korea), Peter S. Ross (Canada), Olga Lukyanova (Russia), Sangjin Lee
(NOWPAP), Peter Kershaw (GESAMP), Jesus Manuel Gago Piñeiro (Spain / ICES)
Invited Speakers:
Marcus Eriksen (5 Gyres Institute, USA)
Francois Galgani (Institut Fran¸cais de Recherche pour l’Exploitation de la Mer (IFREMER), France)
Sunwook Hong (Our Sea of East Asia Network (OSEAN), Korea)
Hideshige Takada (Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Japan)
Background
Marine debris is increasingly recognized as a threat to biota in the ocean, which can have a range of socio￾economic impacts from coastal areas to the open ocean. The majority of marine debris consists of synthetic
polymers, or ‘plastics’, which readily float on the ocean surface or are suspended in the water column.
Microplastics may be attributed to the intentional manufacture of commercial products or the fragmentation of
plastic products. They can increase the bioavailable fraction of marine litter and act as a vector for the delivery
of intrinsic or adsorbed toxic chemicals to exposed biota. Floating, submerged and beached debris have been
documented in marginal seas and the adjacent coastal zone of the North Pacific Ocean. In addition, the
North Pacific Ocean Gyre is known to accumulate floating debris in what has become known as the “Great
Pacific Garbage Patch”. Marine debris represents trans-boundary pollution which can also deliver associated
chemicals and invasive organisms to regions far removed from source. The objective of this session is to
present status and trend information for marine plastic debris pollution and its environmental consequences in
the PICES region. Papers are invited that assess macro- or micro-plastic debris 1) hotspots in the PICES
--- PDF PAGE 25 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 25
region, 2) source and input pathways, 3) long-range transport, 4) role as sink or source of associated toxic
chemicals, and 5) biological and ecological effects. Recommendations on how to address growing problems 
associated with marine debris will be also considered.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Patterns of microplastic distribution in the global ocean and inland environments (Invited)
Marcus Eriksen
Litter in the Mediterranean Sea within the European Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD): Indicators for
descriptor 10, GES and monitoring (Invited)
Francois Galgani
Microlitter: Recommendations for monitoring from the MSFD
Jesus Gago, Richard C. Thompson, Francois Galgani and T. Maes 
Results and lessons learned from joint beach debris surveys by Asian NGOs (Invited)
Yong Chang Jang, Sunwook Hong, Jongmyoung Lee, Jong Su Lee, Sang Hee Hong, Won Joon Shim, Martin Thiel, Fujieda 
Shigeru, Tai-di Chang, Kanyarat Kosavisutte and Trieu Thuy Ha
Hazardous chemicals in plastics in marine environments and their potential effects on marine organisms (Invited)
Hideshige Takada, Kosuke Tanaka, Rei Yamashita and Yutaka Watanuki
Marine litter problem at the Russian Far East and approaches for solution
Iana Blinovskaia
Distribution, sources and abundance of Marine debris in the coastal area of southern part of Primorsky Krai (Russia)
Nikolai Kozlovskii
Sequential monitoring of beach litter at multiple sites using webcams
Tomoya Kataoka, Hirofumi Hinata and Shin’ichiro Kako
Inverse estimation of marine-debris outflows using webcam observation data
Shin’ichiro Kako, Atsuhiko Isobe, Tomoya Kataoka and Hirofumi Hinata
Distribution and impacts of micro- and macro-plastics in coastal British Columbia, Canada
Peter S. Ross, Jean-Pierre W. Desforges, Jean Fong, Moira Galbraith and Wendy Szanizlo
Producing fragmented micro-and nano-plastics from expanded polystyrene with an accelerated mechanical abrasion 
experiment
Won Joon Shim, Young Kyoung Song, Sang Hee Hong, Mi Jang, Gi Myung Han and Seung Won Jung
Analysis of a beach as a time-invariant linear input/output system of marine litter
Tomoya Kataoka, Hirofumi Hinata and Shigeru Kato
Chemicals of concern in plastic marine debris: Hexabromocyclododecanes in expanded polystyrene Products
Sang Hee Hong, Won Joon Shim, Manviri Rani, Mi Jang, Najat Ahmed Al-Odaini, Gi Myung Han and Young Kyoung Song
Leaching characteristics of Hexabromocyclododecane from expanded polystyrene buoy fragments in marine water
Manviri Rani, Won Joon Shim, MiJang, Gi Myung Han, Young Kyoung Song and Sang Hee Hong
Persistent organic pollutants adsorbed on microplastic from two beaches in China
Weiwei Zhang, Zhifeng Zhang, Xindong Ma, Yan Wang and Ling Qu
Transport of marine debris from the 2011 tsunami in Japan: Model simulations and observational evidence
Jan Hafner, Nikolai Maximenko and Gisela Speidel
Selective transport of microplastics and mesoplastics by drifting in coastal waters
Atsuhiko Isobe, Kenta Kubo, Yuka Tamura, Shin’ichio Kako, Etsuko Nakashima and Naoki Fujii 
Poster presentations
Monitoring of traditional and emerging BFRs in expanded polystyrene (EPS) from various countries
Manviri Rani, Sang Hee Hong, Mi Jang, Gi Myung Han and Won Joon Shim
Expanded polystyrene buoy as a moving source of toxic chemicals to marine life: Enrichment of hexabromocyclo￾dodecanes in mussel
Mi Jang, Sang Hee Hong, Manviri Rani, Gi Myung Han, Young Kyoung Song and Won Joon Shim
Compositions and distributions of microplastic in Korean beaches
Young Kyoung Song, Mi Jang, Gi Myung Han, Sang Hee Hong, and Won Joon Shim
--- PDF PAGE 26 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 26
A Nile Red staining method for microplastic identification and quantification
Young Kyoung Song, Sang Hee Hong, Mi Jang, Gi Myung Han and Won Joon Shim
Potential threat of microplastics to neustonic zooplankton in surface waters of the Southern Sea of Korea
Jung-Hoon Kang, Oh-Youn Kwon, Bu-Gyeong Choi and Won Joon Shim
Estimation of used buoy debris outflow from oyster aquaculture with Material Flow Analysis
Su Yeon Hong, Yong Chang Jang, Jongmyoung Lee, Sunwook Hong and Chan Won Lee
Conceptual difference of flow and stock of marine debris and its implications to setting of policy goals and indicators
Yong Chang Jang, Sunwook Hong, Jongmyoung Lee, Hyun Woo Choi and Won Joon Shim
Abundance of packaging debris on beaches increases as non-recycled amount increases: A case in Korea
Yong Chang Jang, Jongmyoung Lee, Sunwook Hong, Jong Su Lee, Su Yeon Hong and Won Joon Shim
The distribution of floating macro- and micro-plastics in the open ocean and Large Marine Ecosystems
Peter J. Kershaw, Courtney Arthur, Marcus Eriksen, Jésus M. Gago Piñeiro, Kara Lavender Law and Laurent Lebreton
Sources, fate and effects of micro-plastics in the marine environment – A global assessment
Peter J. Kershaw, A. Andrady, C. Arthur, J. Baker, H. Boumann, S. Gall, V. Hidalgo-Ruz, A. Koehler, K.L. Law, H. Leslie, J.
Potemra, P. Ryan, W.J. Shim, H. Takada, R. Thompson, A. Turra, D. Verthaak and K. Whyles
POC/MONITOR Topic Session (S9)
Variability in advection and its biological consequences for Subarctic and Arctic ecosystems
Co-Sponsored by the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES)
Co-Convenors: Franz Mueter (USA), Enrique Curchitser (USA), Kenneth Drinkwater (Norway / ICES), Sen
Tok Kim (Russia), Hiroshi Kuroda (Japan) Sei- Ichi Saitoh (Japan)
Invited Speakers:
Georgina Gibson (International Arctic Research Center, University of Alaska Fairbanks, USA)
Background
The advection of water masses and their associated nutrients and plankton is critical to biological processes 
within the subarctic gyres and on the productive shelf regions bordering the gyres. Cross-shelf and along-shelf 
advection and vertical fluxes regulate the supply of nutrients and plankton to these shelves, thereby affecting 
the productivity and species composition of the prey organisms that support higher trophic levels. Moreover, 
the advection of larvae to suitable nursery areas has been linked to the recruitment success of fish and shellfish 
species in many regions, including the subarctic waters of both the Pacific and Atlantic. Interannual variability 
in advection has long been understood as an important source of biological variability, while variability at 
shorter time scales (days to weeks) has only recently received more attention due to the increased availability 
of high-frequency observations and the development of high resolution models. This session explored how 
variability in the fluxes of nutrients, plankton, and early life stages of fish at all scales affects marine 
ecosystem dynamics in the Subarctic and Arctic.
Summary of presentations
The session consisted of 15 oral presentations spanning most of the subarctic Pacific from the Western 
Subarctic Gyre, the Oyashio Region and the Sea of Okhotsk to the Aleutian Islands, Bering Sea, Chukchi Sea 
and the Canadian Basin. In addition, two presentations addressed advective processes in the Atlantic Arctic. 
An invited presentation by Dr. Georgina Gibson (University of Alaska) highlighted interannual differences in 
the transport of zooplankton onto the eastern Bering Sea shelf in response to differences in wind forcing, 
particularly in the direction of the prevailing winds. In spite of these differences, consistent transport pathways 
in the vicinity of submarine canyons were identified using an individual-based particle tracking model.
--- PDF PAGE 27 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 27
Several presentations examined the impact of reduced sea ice on the biological pump and on CO2 fluxes in the 
Chukchi Sea and Canada Basin. Reduced ice results in less light limitation, enhanced stratification due to 
increased warming and freshwater discharge, and changes in nutrient inputs through enhanced upwelling and 
eddy activity. However, the combined effects of these changes on primary production remain uncertain. 
Observations of biological fluxes using sediment traps, combined with modeling, suggest that mesoscale 
eddies originating at the Beaufort shelf break are associated with enhanced production and export of biogenic 
materials from the surface to the deep Northwind Abyssal Plain (Harada et al.). Fluxes were highest at the 
onset of winter (Nov/Dec) in 2010 and 2011, but very limited fluxes were observed in 2012. Much of the 
biogenic fluxes consisted of resting spores and vegetative valves of diatoms, including many ice-associated 
species (Onodera et al.). The lack of pronounced biogenic fluxes in 2012 was likely associated with an 
intensification and westward shift of the oligotrophic waters of the Beaufort Gyre (Onodera et al.). 
Measurements of primary production in 2004 and 2009 suggested that reduced primary production was 
associated with stronger stratification, while enhanced primary production was observed around the edges of 
an eddy due to upward vertical fluxes of nutrients (Yun et al.). In addition to changes in production, vertical 
fluxes associated with the biological pump, as well as horizontal advection, contribute to the role of the Bering 
Sea shelf and the northern Chukchi Sea shelf as important CO2 sinks (Futsuki et al.).
 
Tsukazaki et al. (presented by I. Imai) highlight the importance of resting stages of diatoms to seed both the 
ice-associated spring bloom and the phytoplankton bloom. Resting stage cells reflect the species composition 
in the water column and occur in densities as high as 7 million cells per cm3 of water. Cells are re-suspended to 
seed the water column in the spring or summer and are embedded in the ice when it forms in the fall. Spring 
bloom dynamics at the melting ice edge were examined by Fujiwara et al. (presented by S.-I. Saitoh). Earlier 
ice retreat was associated with larger phytoplankton in the ice-associated spring bloom averaged over the 14 
days following ice retreat. This was attributed to under-ice blooms utilizing nutrients in the surface water, 
followed by rapid thermal stratification after the ice melts. In contrast, when the ice retreats early, thermal 
stratification occurs more gradually and higher nutrient concentrations may have resulted in blooms of larger 
diatom species.
Zooplankton distributions in the Chukchi Sea differ among water masses with most groups more abundant in 
Bering Sea and Anadyr water compared to Alaska coastal waters and with higher abundances in recent years 
(2008, 2010) compared to an earlier period (1991/92, Sasaki et al.). Enhanced zooplankton production was 
also observed in an eddy originating off the western Aleutian Islands in early 2010. The cold-core eddy 
entrained colder Alaska Stream waters in late winter and propagated southeast for 5 months prior to sampling 
(Saito et al.). Advection associated with the summer monsoon over Asia affect zooplankton dynamics in Peter 
the Great Bay (Zuenko and Nadtochy). A weaker summer monsoon was associated with stronger stratification 
in the bay and reduced onshore advection of predatory species (e.g.. Sagitta elegans). Although the stronger 
stratification resulted in reduced production, zooplankton appeared to have sufficient food and the abundances 
of coastal, non-predatory zooplankton species actually increased, presumably because of reduced predation.
Two presentations addressed the role of advection in transporting fish eggs and larvae. Walleye pollock off 
Northeast Sakhalin Island spawn in very cold waters over the shelf, rising into the warmer surface layer and 
drifting south in the East Sakhalin current as they develop (Kim et al.). Eggs and larvae may be entrained in 
the East Sakhalin counter current to reach their (unknown) nursery grounds. Mueter et al. contrasted advection 
from the Subarctic to the Arctic between the Pacific and Atlantic Oceans and compared life history adaptations 
of fish in each region to these contrasting patterns, concluding that it is unlikely that major fish populations 
will expand into the Pacific Arctic in the foreseeable future, whereas species in the Atlantic are well positioned 
to take advantage of new and expanding open water areas.
Phytoplankton dynamics in the western Pacific were the subject of two other presentations. Fujiki et al. 
showed that phytoplankton in the western Subarctic Gyre are nutrient stressed during summer, even though 
macronutrients were not limiting. Incubation experiments revealed continued growth after iron enrichment. 
Therefore the magnitude and duration of the phytoplankton bloom in the western subarctic gyre appears to be 
controlled by the availability of iron. Kuroda et al. advance a compelling and well supported hypothesis for the 
--- PDF PAGE 28 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 28
advective processes that contribute to the intense spring bloom observed off the east coast of Hokkaido Island. 
According to this hypothesis, East Sakhalin Current water exits the Sea of Okhotsk through Kunashiri Strait 
forming coastal Oyashio water. The water includes iron-rich waters from the Amur River and mixes with 
Oyashio water to support the intense spring bloom.
Finally, Drinkwater reviewed outflows from the Arctic to the Subarctic in the Barents Sea, Fram Strait and 
through the Canadian Archipelago. Outflows through the latter consist of 40–60% Pacific source waters, 
affecting stratification and advecting Arctic zooplankton species (Calanus hyperboreus) as far south as the 
Gulf of Maine and Mid-Atlantic Bight. Similarly, outflows from Fram Strait continue through Denmark Strait 
and can affect stratification and the timing of the bloom in both the East Greenland and West Greenland 
currents. These outflows also export plankton from the Arctic, including large numbers of ice algae, and may 
have carried the Pacific phytoplankton Neodenticula seminae into the Atlantic in the late 1990s and early 
2000s.
Clearly, vertical and horizontal fluxes of freshwater, nutrients and plankton are important to understanding the 
dynamics of subarctic-Arctic interactions. While much progress has been made in understanding fluxes of salt, 
heat and nutrients, resolving biological fluxes and their spatio-temporal patterns of variability will require 
sampling and higher temporal and spatial resolution in combination with modeling. As the invited presentation 
demonstrated, short term wind events and meso-scale eddies can have important and disproportional influences 
on the advection of nutrients and plankton (Gibson et al.).
List of presentations
Oral presentations
The relative importance of advective vs. in-situ processes to mesozooplankton biomass on the Eastern Bering Sea shelf 
(Invited)
GeorginaA. Gibson,Albert Hermann, Kenneth Coyle, Katherine Hedstrom and Enrique Curchitser
Catastrophic reduction of sea-ice in the Arctic Ocean - its impact on the marine ecosystems in the polar region
Naomi Harada, Katsunori Kimoto, Jonaotaro Onodera, Eiji Watanabe, Makio C. Honda, Michio J. Kishi, Takashi Kikuchi and
Yuichiro Tanaka
Seasonal cycle of phytoplankton community structure and photophysiological state in the western subarctic gyre of the 
North Pacific
Tetsuichi Fujiki, Kazuhiko Matsumoto, Yoshihisa Mino, Kosei Sasaoka, Masahide Wakita, Hajime Kawakami, Makio C. Honda, 
Shuichi Watanabe and Toshiro Saino
Siliceous phytoplankton flux reflecting oceanographic variation in the southern Northwind Abyssal Plain
Jonaotaro Onodera, Eiji Watanabe and Naomi Harada
A biological contribution to partial pressure of CO2 in the western Arctic Ocean and Bering Sea 
Ryosuke Futsuki, Toru Hirawake, Amane Fujiwara, Takashi Kikuchi, Shigeto Nishino, Daisuke Sasano, Masao Ishii, Hiroshi 
Uchida and Sei-Ichi Saitoh
Current status of primary production in the western Arctic Ocean
Mi Sun Yun, Bo Kyung Kim, Eun Jin Yang, Sung-Ho Kang, Terry E. Whitledge, Mike Gong and Sang H. Lee
Distribution of viable diatom resting stage cells in bottom sediments and water columns in the Chukchi Sea: Importance 
as seed populations of spring bloom
Chiko Tsukazaki, Ken-Ichiro Ishii, Kohei Matsuno, Atsushi Yamaguchi and Ichiro Imai
Assessment of the relationship between timing of sea-ice retreat and phytoplankton community size structure derived 
from remote sensing in the Bering and Chukchi Sea shelf region
Amane Fujiwara, Toru Hirawake, Koji Suzuki, Ichiro Imai and Sei-Ichi Saitoh
Spatial and temporal changes of zooplankton community in the Chukchi Sea
Hiroko Sasaki, Kohei Matsuno, Atsushi Yamaguchi, Yutaka Watanuki and Takashi Kikuchi
Cross-shelf advection as a mechanism of regional climate change influence on plankton community in the coastal waters
Yury Zuenko and Victoria Nadtochy
Pacific and Atlantic gateways to the Arctic for plankton and fish
Franz J. Mueter, Seth Danielson, Harald Gjøsæter and Kenneth F. Drinkwater
--- PDF PAGE 29 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 29
Reproduction of walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) and some oceanographic parameters of their habitat off 
eastern Sakhalin Island, Sea of Okhotsk
Sen Tok Kim, I.N. Mukhametov, G.V. Shevchenko and V.N. Chastikov
Distribution, transport pathway and modification of the Coastal Oyashio water, off the Hokkaido coast, in the 
Northwestern Pacific
Hiroshi Kuroda, Yuko Toya, Taku Wagawa, Akira Kuwata, Shin-ichi Ito and Shigeho Kakehi 
Hydrography of an Aleutian eddy in the developing phase and the potential influence to lower trophic level ecosystems
Rui Saito, Ichiro Yasuda, Kosei Komatsu, Hiromu Ishiyama, Hiromichi Ueno, Hiroji Onishi, Atsushi Yamaguchi, Takeshi 
Setou and Manabu Shimizu
Some effects of advection between the Arctic and Subarctic
Kenneth F. Drinkwater
POC/TCODE FUTURE (S10)
Regional climate modeling in the North Pacific
Co-Convenors: Chan Joo Jang (Korea), Kyung-Il Chang (Korea), Enrique Curchitser (USA), Michael Foreman
(Canada), Shin-ichi Ito (Japan), Angelica Peña (Canada), Hyodae Seo (USA)
Invited Speakers:
Enrique Curchitser (Rutgers University, USA)
Eun Soon Im (Singapore-MIT Alliance for Research and Technology (SMART), Singapore/USA)
Hyun-Suk Kang (National Institute of Meteorological Research, Korea)
Hyoun-Woo Kang (KIOST-PML Science Office, UK)
Kei Sakamoto (Meteorological Research Institute, Japan)
Hyodae Seo (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, USA
Background
Regional climate models are a key scientific tool for understanding climate change at regional to local scale, 
which is highly relevant to considerations for many socio-economic impacts. Despite the apparent limitations 
associated with errors in forcing fields and uncertainties in downscaling techniques, regional climate models 
continue to provide critical information for regional climate change by filling the gap between projections by 
global climate models and demand for developing adaptation and mitigation strategies at highly resolved 
scales. This session calls for papers addressing the recent efforts for regional climate modeling such as 
developing novel approaches for dynamic downscaling, comparison between regional and global climate 
model results, detection and evaluation of regional climate changes in the North Pacific Ocean simulated by 
regional and global climate models, assessment of their uncertainty, and coupling of regional climate models 
with other Earth system model components such as biogeochemical and ecological models. The intent of the 
session was to assemble and share existing expertise in recent efforts to regional climate models by providing a 
platform to discuss their limitations and reliability.
Summary of Presentations
About 40 persons attended and 15 presentations were made. Unfortunately, two presentations from China and 
Russia were cancelled, and four other countries’ members contributed the oral presentations. In addition, three 
poster presentations were made. The session started with a brief introduction of the session by Dr. Chan Joo 
Jang: needs of regional climate models to investigate the current and future states of coastal ocean and marine 
ecosystems.
The first invited talk by Enrique Curchitser showed three examples (two eastern boundary upwelling systems 
and one western boundary current) of the NCAR Community Earth System Model (CESM) application using 
the nested high-resolution ROMS model. The examples demonstrated the need for better representation of 
--- PDF PAGE 30 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 30
oceanic mesoscale processes such as the coastal upwelling and the local ocean currents for the improved 
simulation of regional and global climate. The presentation also discussed the issue related to the interpolation 
of near-shore wind in the coupled model along the eastern boundary upwelling zones to which the coastal 
upwelling is sensitive. The second invited talk by Hyodae Seo showed an excellent model application to 
investigate effects of eddy-wind interactions in the California Current System on the eddy kinetic energy and 
Ekman pumping. Interactions between eddy current and wind showed quite large damping impacts on the eddy 
activity in the California Current System, and this was nearly entirely due to the eddy-induced surface current 
effect on wind stress as opposed to the eddy-induced surface temperatures. Third invited talk by Hyun-Suk 
Kang introduced current status and the future perspective of the upcoming Coordinated Regional Downscaling 
Experiment (CORDEX) and its achievements for the East Asia domain. CORDEX is a WCRP-sponsored 
research program that aims to provide a coordinated regional model evaluation framework, a climate 
projection framework, and an interface to the applicants of the climate simulations in climate change impact, 
adaptation, and mitigation studies. Fourth invited talk by Eun-Soon Im introduced another CORDEX 
participating model: the MIT Regional Climate Model (MRCM). The talk showed the importance of the 
improved schemes for atmospheric deep convection and clouds and coupling of a biosphere simulator in 
MRCM for the simulation of precipitation in the Maritime Continent and the West African Monsoon. Fifth 
invited talk by Hyoun-Woo Kang showed an application of a regional marine system model on the 
northwestern Pacific and the variability of Yellow and the East China Seas, with the emphasis on the impacts 
of tides and river discharge on the biogeochemistry. The sixth invited talk by Kei Sakamoto showed an 
example of high resolution operational model in Seto-Inland-Sea and its extension to the around Japan model. 
There are many excellent contributed talks and dominated by young scientists especially from the Republic of 
Korea. The contributions of young Korean scientists gave us perspectives of further and continuing 
developments of regional climate modeling.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Climate—Boundary current interactions: Stories from East and West (Invited)
Enrique Curchitser, Justin Small, William Large, Raphael Dussin, Katherine Hedstrom and Brian Kaufman
Regional coupled modeling of the eddy-wind interactions in the California Current System (Invited)
Hyodae Seo
Climate change projection for the western North Pacific Ocean by dynamical downscaling
Chul Min Ko, Chan Joo Jang, Ho-Jeong Shin and Yong Sun Kim
Regional climate change projection for the northwest Pacific marginal seas
Gwang-Ho Seo, Yang-Ki Cho, Byoung-Ju Choi and Kwang-Yul Kim 
CORDEX and its recent progress for East Asia (Invited)
Hyun-Suk Kang, S. Hong, J.-Y. Jung, M.-S. Suh, S.-K. Oh, D.-H. Cha and S.-K. Min
Introducing the MIT Regional Climate Model (MRCM) and its application to climate studies worldwide (Invited)
Eun-Soon Im and Elfatih A.B. Eltahir
Projected change in the East Asian summer monsoon from dynamical downscaling: Moisture budget analysis
Chun-Yong Jung, Chan Joo Jang, Hyung-Jin Kim and Ho-Jeong Shin
An assessment of ocean climate reanalysis by the Data Assimilation System of KIOST
Young Ho Kim, Chorong Hwang and Byoung-Ju Choi 
Application of a regional marine system model on the northwestern Pacific and the variability of the yellow and the East 
China Seas (Invited)
Hyoun-Woo Kang, Hanna Kim, Jae Kwi So, Momme Butenschon and Icarus Allen
Development of a Seto-Inland-Sea model toward operational monitoring and forecasting (Invited)
Kei Sakamoto, Goro Yamanaka, Hiroyuki Tsujino, Hideyuki Nakano, Norihisa Usui and Shogo Urakawa
A biogeochemical model for the British Columbia continental shelf
Angelica Peña, Diane Masson and Michael Foreman
Transport of Todarodes pacificus winter cohort into the Yellow Sea in the early life states
Ji-Young Song, Joon-Soo Lee, Jung-Jin Kim and Ho-Jin Lee 
Impact of horizontal model resolution on air-sea CO2 exchange in the California Current
Jerome Fiechter, Enrique Curchitser, Christopher Edwards, Fei Chai, Nicole Goebel and Francisco Chavez
--- PDF PAGE 31 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 31
Seasonality and linear trend of circulation around Korea derived from multi-platform observations
Sung Yong Kim
Regime-dependent nonstationary relationship between the East Asian winter monsoon and North Pacific Oscillation
Gyundo Pak, Young-Hyang Park, Frederic Vivier, Young-Oh Kwon and Kyung-Il Chang
Poster presentations
Characteristics of physical elements during a typical algae bloom in the Yellow Sea
Xu Shanshan, Dong Mingmei, Yu Ting and Miao Qingsheng
Regional efficacy of ocean heat uptake under a CO2 quadrupling
Ho-Jeong Shin, Ken Caldeira, Chan Joo Jang and Yong Sun Kim
Analysis of HadGEM2-AO historical and climate forecasting experiments
Haejin Kim, Cheol-Ho Kim and Hong-Ryeol Shin
MarWeb Topic Session (S11)
Ecological and human social analyses and issues relating to Integrated Multi Trophic Aquaculture
Co-Convenors: Masahito Hirota (Japan), Jianguang Fang (China), Mitsutaku Makino (Japan), Grant Murray
(Canada), Naesun Park (Korea), Mark Wells (USA)
Invited Speakers:
Thierry Chopin (University of New Brunswick, Canada)
Mark Flaherty (University of Victoria, Canada)
Susanna Nurdjaman (Bandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia)
Suhendar I Sachoemar (Agency for the Assessment and Application of Technology (BPPT), Indonesia)
Background
Several recent studies and reports suggest that increased aquaculture production is essential if we are to meet 
the growing world demands for marine protein. However, the rapid current development of intensive fed 
aquaculture (e.g., finfish and shrimp), in both developed and developing countries, has generated concerns 
about the environmental impacts of these often monospecific practices. To help address such issues, Integrated 
Multi- Trophic Aquaculture (IMTA) has been attracting global attention as a means to conduct aquaculture 
activities, while at the same time improving/rehabilitating coastal environmental conditions and improving the 
well-being of the people living in coastal areas. By integrating fed aquaculture with inorganic and organic 
extractive aquaculture (seaweed and invertebrates), the wastes of one resource become a resource (fertilizer or 
food) for the others. This “ecosystem-like” approach provides nutrient bioremediation capabilities, mutual 
benefits to the co-cultured organisms, economic diversification by production of other value-added marine 
products, and increased profitability and food security for the local community. This session seeks 
contributions and case studies of how to implement and conduct IMTA activities, in particular that reduce 
negative impacts to the quality of the local environment and improve the well-being of the local human 
communities. Examples of activities in tropical and semi-tropical locations are particularly welcome, as well as 
examples of general methods and approaches that can be applied in many different environments. This session 
is a contribution of, and towards, the work of the PICES Project on Marine Ecosystem Health and Human 
Well-Being (MarWeB).
Summary of presentations
This Topic Session started with the introduction by Dr. Masahito Hirota of FRA Japan, saying the objective of 
this session is to seek how to implement and conduct IMTA effectively, and contribute to PICES-MAFF 
MarWeB Project. 7 presentations were made in this Topic Session. About 25 participants actively discussed 
the social and ecological aspects of IMTA. 
--- PDF PAGE 32 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 32
The first invited speaker, Dr. Thierry Chopin of Univ. New Brunswick, Canada, talked about the IMTA 
concept and the history of IMTA. He introduced many IMTA cases demonstrating that IMTA is extremely 
flexible in terms of component species, location, objectives, etc. Combination with agricultural crops such as 
rice is also a type of IMTA. He spoke about the Wando area in Korea, where IMTA also is being conducted. 
Finally, he discussed variety of ways of utilizing IMTA for more efficient nutrient recycling in the sustainable 
society, including a social system of Nutrient Trading Credit (NTC) that is similar to carbon trading credit 
(CTC). 
The second invited presenter, Dr. Mark Flaherty of the University of Victoria, Canada, spoke about the social 
aspects of IMTA. In BC, Canada, there is only one IMTA operation, but it moved forward only because it did 
not use salmon. There is great social resistance in some quarters to the commercial aquaculture of salmon. 
Even in the case of many coastal communities, especially that of the First Nations, that have low indicators of 
human well-being, believe that the wild salmon fishery is more important and oppose commercial salmon 
aquaculture. However, some First Nations communities embrace aquaculture is an important source of jobs 
and economic development. Based on the interview study in BC, he discussed how improved understanding of 
IMTA by First Nation people can be facilitated. 
Prof. Mark Wells, University of Maine, USA, talked about the ongoing MAFF-funded IMTA experimental 
study in Karawang, Indonesia. The IMTA in this case is Shrimp/Tilapia, Gracilaria,and Anadara. Based on the 
results of the IMTA pond experiment, there were no negative effects on the production of shrimp/tilapia. The 
effects on water quality (N, P, Si, Chl) was also discussed. He reported the shrimp-only pond was damaged by 
the white-spot disease, while IMTA pond was not. Though it is tempting to suggest that IMTA may have 
contributed to white spot resistance, there is no direct evidence for this effect.
After the coffee break, the invited speaker, Prof. Suhendar Sachoamer from BPPT Indonesia, presented the 
Blue Economy Policy and dissemination activities of IMTA in Indonesia. In Indonesia, the huge issue is the 
erosion of land because of the destruction of the mangrove forest for making shrimp aquaculture pond and 
abandon of the ponds after the white-spot disease. IMTA can be a tool to rehabilitate the diseased aquaculture 
pond, to re-create jobs for coastal communities, and to protect the coastline against the erosion.
The final invited speaker, Dr. Susanna Nurdjaman from the Nandung Institute of Technology, Indonesia, 
presented the many issues relating to the aquaculture in Indonesia, such as diseases, mangrove destruction, 
coastal water degradation, biosecurity, etc. She emphasized the difficulty of changing the mindset of the local 
people. But the concept of Sato-Umi (harmony of coastal human life and the coastal ecosystem biodiversity) 
can be a clue. Finally, she presented her future plan on the material circulation model.
Mr. Emmanuel Sweke of Hokkaido University, Japan, presented a social-ecological systems study on the 
coastal fisheries in the Eastern part of Hokkaido, Japan. Using data from the Akkeshi area and the Erimo area, 
he discussed cumulative effects from the climate change (sea surface temperature), boat size, demography, 
local people’s perception to the local fisheries. 
The discussion, was chaired by Prof. Wells. The influences from legal regulations, societal perception of 
IMTA, acceptability by the commercial farmers, differences between Asia and the Western World, effects and 
scale of nutrient reduction, etc., were discussed.
Dr. B.A. Venmathi Maran presented a poster in this session on how climate change may affect parasites of 
marine fishes and the implications for Korean aquaculture. He highlighted how parasitic crustaceans belonging 
to the Subclass Copepoda are well documented in other coastal regions, but very little is known about parasitic 
copepods infecting marine fish on the Korean peninsula.
The second poster in this session, given by Dr. Konstantin A. Drozdov, was on the accumulation of lactate in 
the coelomic fluid of sea urchins under conditions of hypoxia. This accumulate, from the anaerobic digestion 
of glucose, is an indicator that sea urchins are capable of anaerobic metabolism.
Some overall comments: 
▪ The social dimension acceptance of IMTA differs greatly between developed and developing nations, with 
--- PDF PAGE 33 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 33
the latter strongly ready to adapt to accept new methods that can be demonstrated to have limited negative 
environmental effects, while strong resistance to IMTA is routed in some developed nations, fueled in 
large part by media rather than scientific dissemination.
▪ Implication of IMTA is far easier in developing nations due to the highly restrictive regulatory 
environment in some developed nations (Canada in particular).
▪ Regulations surrounding IMTA must be followed by enforcement for the environmental benefits to 
develop. This may be problematic in some developing nations.
▪ Assessing the environmental benefits of IMTA in developed, or well-developed nations is assessed on the 
environments in which the IMTA is placed (that is, assessing area’s beyond the individual IMTA 
footprint). Sampling individual IMTA facilities (within or immediately adjacent to the IMTA footprint) is 
logistically difficult due to their position in dynamic physical environments. In contrast, IMTA in 
developing nations more often occurs in pond-type facilities, or embayments with very high-density 
aquaculture, so more a balanced nutrient input/removal is needed within the IMTA system footprint to 
achieve the desired environmental benefits.
List of papers
Oral presenations
Integrated Multi-Trophic Aquaculture (IMTA): An environmentally, economically and societally responsible
aquanomic approach to farming the sea with many variations(Invited)
Thierry Chopin
Obtaining a social license for IMTA: Challenges and opportunities in British Columbia, Canada (Invited)
Mark Flaherty
The effect of multi-trophic aquaculture on nutrient loading in fish and shrimp ponds, Karawang Indonesia
Mark L. Wells, Mitsutaku Makino, Suhendar I. Sachoemar and Masahito Hirota 
Dissemination of SATO UMI for sustainable aquaculture development in Indonesia (Invited)
Suhendar I. Sachoemar, TetsuoYanagi, Mitsutaku Makino, Mark L.Wells, Masahito Hirota and Ratu Siti Aliah
Implementation of SATO UMI concept at pond aquaculture in Karawang, Indonesia (Invited)
Susanna Nurdjaman, Tetsuo Yanagi and Suhendar I. Sachoemar
Social-ecological studies towards the integrated management of local fisheries in North- Eastern Hokkaido, Japan
Emmanuel A. Sweke, Rotaro Okazaki, Yumi Kobayashi, Mitsutaku Makino and Yasunori Sakurai 
Poster presentations
Accumulation of lactate in the coelomic fluid of sea urchins under stress suggests the switching-on of anaerobic glycolysis
Konstantin A. Drozdov, Anatoliy L. Drozdov and Lidia T. Kovekovdova
BIO Contributed Paper Session
Co-Convenors: Angelica Peña (Canada), Atsushi Tsuda (Japan)
Background
The Biological Oceanography Committee (BIO) has a wide range of interests spanning from molecular to 
global scales. BIO targets all organisms living in the marine environment including bacteria, phytoplankton, 
zooplankton, micronekton, benthos and marine birds and mammals. This year, the BIO paper session (October
23, chaired by Drs. Angelica Peña and Atsushi Tsuda) included 10 oral (half day session) and 15 poster 
presentations from 5 PICES member countries and from Taiwan. About 30 participants attended the BIO paper 
session (oral), and discussions after the presentation were fruitful. Especially, new genetic based methods such 
as ‘omics’ studies using a NGS (next generation sequencer) and nanomolar level measurements of nutrient 
concentrations seem to promise new directions within Biological Oceanography.
--- PDF PAGE 34 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 34
List of papers
Oral presentations
Pseudo-nitzschia diversity in the North Pacific from Continuous Plankton Recorder surveys
Rowena Stern, Vera Trainer, Stephanie Moore and Sonia Batten
Determination of nanomolar concentration phosphate in seawater using a long-path liquid waveguide capillary cell 
(LWCC)
Eun-Ju Park, Dong-Jin Kang, Sung-Rok Cho, Tae-Keun Rho and Eun-Soo Kim
New approach for primary productivity assessment in the Bering Sea
Kirill Kivva
Age determination and growth rate of Mactra chinensis (Bivalvia, Mactridae) by external rings and chondrophore growth 
bands
Jung-Yeon Kim, Ho Jin Bae and Chul-Woong Oh 
Responses in macrozooplankton population to water mass exchange and the spring phytoplankton bloom in the Oyashio 
region
Yoshiyuki Abe, Atsushi Yamaguchi, Yuichiro Yamada, Kohei Matsuno, Rui Saito, Hiromichi Ueno, Kosei Komatsu, Takashi 
Setou, Manabu Shimizu and Ichiro Imai
Comprehensive transcriptome study to develop the molecular resources of the copepod (Calanus sinicus) for their 
potential ecological applications
Hongjun Li and QingYang
Effects of water temperature on distribution and life cycle of northern shrimp at the southwest coast of Kamchatka
Oksana G. Mikhailova
Population structure and life history of Neomysis awatschensis (Crustacea: Mysidae) in Jeju Island, Korea
Jaeyong Bae and Wongyu Park
Estimation of prey consumption by sei, Bryde’s, common minke and sperm whales in the western North Pacific taking 
into account uncertainties
Tsutomu Tamura, Kenji Konishi, Koji Matsuoka and Takashi Hakamada
Poster presentations
Comparison of benthic community structure and installed area on two artificial reef types
Ji-Hyun Lee, Wan Ki Kim, Yong Soo Son and Chae-Sung Lee
A method for simultaneous determination of chlorophyll and pheopigments using a spectrofluorometer
Cho-Rong Moon, Dong-Jin Kang, Sung-Hyun Kahng and Eun-Soo Kim
Decadal change of spatial distribution of Steller sea lions around Ishikari-Bay, Sea of Japan
Kaoru Hattori, Akihiko Wada and Orio Yamamura
Persistent organic contaminants in tissue and organs of fulmar Fulmarus Glacialis from the coast of Eastern Kamchatka 
and the Kuril Islands
Vasiliy Tsygankov, Margarita Boyarova and Olga Lukyanova
Detecting the phytoplankton non-uniform distribution around the warm core rings
Haruka Nishikawa, Yumi Yamashita, Yoshikazu Sasai and Hideharu Sasak
Evaluation of incubation volume effect on in-situ Euphausia pacifica grazing rates on natural food assemblages
Ah-Ra Ko, Se-Jong Ju, Eun-Jin Yang and C. Tracy Shaw
Tracking seasonal dietary shift of Euphausia pacifica in the Yellow Sea using stomach contents and lipid biomarkers
Ah-Ra Ko, Se-Jong Ju and Hye Seon Kim
Diet of chaetognaths Sagitta nagae, S. crassa in Yellow sea inferred from gut content and signature fatty acid analyses
Hyun Jin Yoon, Ah-Ra Ko, Joong Ki Choi and Se-Jong Ju
Monsoon-driven hydrographic features affect thaliacean distribution in the Taiwanese waters, western North Pacific 
Ocean
Wen-tseng Lo, Zhen-heng Liao and Hung-yen Hsieh
Exploring the variability and role of functional diversity on copepod communities of the western subarctic North Pacific
Carmen García-Comas, Sanae Chiba, Hiroya Sugisaki, Taketo Hashioka and S. Lan Smith
How water resources management can impact on coastal ecosystem: Implications from watersheds connected to coastal bays
Nam-Il Won
--- PDF PAGE 35 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 35
Phenology of calanoid copepod: Calanus pacificus associated with sea surface temperature in the western subarctic North 
Pacific
Tomoko M. Yoshiki, Sanae Chiba, Tadafumi Ichikawa, Hiroya Sugisaki and Sonia Batten
Abrupt change in phytoplankton community in the Kuroshio region of the East China Sea associated with the Kuroshio 
frontal eddy
Naoki Yoshie, Kohei Sakamoto, Miwa Nakagawa, Eisuke Tsutsumi and Xinyu Guo
Top predators partition the Bering Sea
Andrew W. Trites, B. Battaile, K.J. Benoit-Bird, A. Harding, S. Heppell, B. Hoover, D. Irons, N. Jones, K. Kuletz, C. Nordstrom, 
R. Paredes and D. Roby
Grazing pressure of the size-fractionated copepod community on phytoplankton and protozoan preys at a fixed station, 
southeastern coast of Korea
Bome Song, Hyung-Ku Kang, Woo Yul Yi and Joong Ki Choi
FIS Contributed Paper Session
Co-Convenors: Xianshi Jin (China), Elizabeth Logerwell (USA)
Background
This session invited papers addressing general topics in fishery science and fisheries oceanography in the North
Pacific and its marginal seas, except those covered by Topic Sessions sponsored by the Fishery Science Committee
(FIS).
List of papers
Oral presentations
Shelf Habitat and EcoLogy of Fish and Zooplankton (SHELFZ) of the Chukchi Sea 2013 
Elizabeth A. Logerwell, Kimberly M. Rand, Leandra de Sousa, Alexi Pinchuk, Sandra Parker-Stetter, John Horne, Johanna
Vollenweider and Ron Heintz
Spatiotemporal variation of benthic communities associated with weathervane scallop (Patinopecten caurinus) beds off
Alaska
Jessica R. Glass and Gordon H. Kruse
Toothed whale interactions with longline fisheries in Alaska and economic implications
Megan J. Peterson, Franz J. Mueter, Courtney Carothers, Keith R. Criddle and Alan C. Haynie
Spatial-temporal variation in feeding pattern and trophic position of Pacific salmon in the North Pacific Ocean
Yuxue Qin and Masahide Kaeriyama
Comparison of anchovy biomass estimates measured by trawls, egg production methods and hydro acoustics in the 
Chesapeake Bay and the Korea Strait
Sukgeun Jung and Edward D. Houde
Interannual variations in abundance and distribution of Japanese jack mackerel Trachurus japonicas larvae in the shelf￾break region of the East China Sea during late winter and spring
Chiyuki Sassa, Motomitsu Takahashi, Yoshinobu Konishi and Youichi Tsukamoto
Vertical distribution of common squid (Todarodes pacificus) paralarvae in the northern East China Sea
Hwa Hyun Lee, Suam Kim and Chul Park
A spatially explicit account of California fisheries as ecosystem services
John C. Field, Rebecca R. Miller, Jarrod A. Santora, Rosemary Kosaka and Cindy Thomson
Pollock fishery and stock assessment
Oleg Bulatov
--- PDF PAGE 36 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 36
Poster presentations
Short term exposure of migratory coho salmon Oncorhynchus kisutch to increased CO2 concentrations impairs olfactory 
sensitivity to homing cues
Junho Eom, Nolan Bett, Wes Didier, David Close and Sang-Seon Yun
Pelagic ecosystem monitoring in British Columbia, Canada
Jennifer L. Boldt, Stéphane Gauthier, Henrik Kreiberg, Doug Bertram, Jaclyn Cleary, George Cronkite, Linnea Flostrand,
Jackie Detering, Vanessa Hodes, John Holmes, Moira Galbraith, Kyle Garver, Chris Grandin, John Holmes, Stewart Johnson,
Jacquelynne King, Sean MacConnachie, Bruce McCarter, Chrys Neville, Linda Nichol, R. Ian Perry, Dennis Rutherford,
Nathan Taylor, Mary Thiess, Matt Thompson, Marc Trudel and Greg Workman
MEQ Contributed PaperSession
Co-Convenors: Chuanlin Huo (China), Darlene Smith (Canada)
Background
Papers were invited on all aspects of marine environmental quality research in the North Pacific and its
marginal seas, except those covered by Topic Sessions sponsored by the Marine Environmental Quality
Committee (MEQ).
List of papers
Oral presentations
Arrival of Fukushima radioactivity in North American continental waters
John N. Smith, Robin M. Brown, Marie Robert, William J. Williams and Richard Nelson
Legacy POPs: Are they finally fading from marine foodchains?
John E. Elliott, Aroha Miller, Kyle H. Elliott, Melanie F. Guigueno and Sandi Lee 
POPs biotransport by Pacific salmon to the Russian coast of the Northwestern Pacific
Olga Lukyanova, Vasiliy Tsygankov, Margarita Boyarova and Nadezhda Khrisoforova
Comparison of oil exposure methods to filter feeding bivalve
Andrew Jin Yi Loh, Un Hyuk Yim, Sung Yong Ha, Joon Geon An and Won Joon Shim
Poster presentations
Assessment of marine environment quality in Peter the Great Bay (the Sea of Japan) 
Tatyana A. Belan, Alexander V. Moshchenko, Boris M. Borisov, Tatiana S. Lishavskaya and Alexander V. Sevastianov
Marine environmental impacts of the Japanese nuclear power plant “Fukushima-1” accident in the Far Eastern seas
Eugene V. Karasev, Emiliya L. Chaikovskaya and Tatiana S. Lishavskaya
Toxic elements in seaweed Undaria pinnatifida, Laminaria saccharina, Cystoseira barbata, Costaria costata from the Peter
the Great Bay (Japan Sea)
Lidia T. Kovekovdova, Denis P. Kiku and Irina S. Kasyanenko
Investigation of content of artificial radionuclides in the commercial crustacea in the North West part of the Japan Sea
Galina S. Borisenko and Yury G. Blinov
Monitoring of mercury in the Russian Far Eastern Seas
Mikhail V. Simokon and Irina S. Kasyanenko
Integrative assessment of sediment contamination by toxic organic contaminants in an enclosed bay in South Korea
Gi Myung Han, Sang Hee Hong, Won Joon Shim, Sung Yong Ha, Nam Sook Kim, Joon Geon An and Un Hyuk Yim
Effects of solvents on the photooxidation of phenanthrene and identification of its photoproducts
Ravi Shankar, Un Hyuk Yim, Song Yong Ha, Joon Geon An and Won Joon Shim
Summer variations in interleukin-1α-like substance levels in phagocytes of holothurian Eupentacta fraudatrix in Peter the
Great Bay, Sea of Japan
Liudmila Dolmatova and Olga Ulanova
--- PDF PAGE 37 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 37
POC Contributed PaperSession
Co-Convenors: Kyung-Il Chang (Korea), Michael Foreman (Canada)
Background
Papers were invited on all aspects of physical and biogeochemical oceanography and climate in the North 
Pacific and its marginal seas, except those covered by Topic Sessions sponsored by the Physical Oceanography 
and Climate Committee (POC).
Summary of sessions
The session consisted of nineteen oral presentations and thirteen posters covering a wide range of physical and 
biogeochemical oceanographic research. There were no oral cancellations. Drs. Kyung-Il Chang, and Michael
Foreman chaired sub-sessions over the two-day presentation period. The first half of the session on Thursday 
afternoon included interesting talks related to: i) analyses of summer turbulence measurements in the East 
China Sea (Furuichi), ii) analyses of internal tide and vertical mixing observations in the southwestern East 
Sea (Seo), iii) modal analyses of internal observations and numerical simulations near the Korea Strait 
entrance to the East/Japan Sea (Lee), iv) analyses of tidal observations off the east coast of Sakhalin Island 
(Maryina), v) an analysis of cross-shelf patterns in upwelling along the central and northern regions of 
California (Jacox), vi) vertical particle motions near mesoscale eddies and the effect of submesoscales (Chang) 
vii) numerical simulation of water-borne virus transport between salmon farms in the Discovery Islands region 
of British Columbia (Foreman), viii) internal tide and other interactions between coastal and open sea waters 
(Navrotsky), ix) analyses of satellite sea surface salinity measurements in the East Sea (Lim), and x) a 
comparison of satellite altimetry and pressure-recording inverted echo-sounders in the North Equatorial 
Current (Jeon).
The second half of the session on Friday morning was no less diverse in its topic coverage. Gao presented an 
analysis of decadal changes in pCO2 and ocean acidification in the western Arctic Ocean; Park investigated 
variability in flows through the Kerama Gap induced by mesoscale eddies; Kuzin simulated past and future 
river runoff into the Eastern Siberian shelf and its subsequent dispersion in the Arctic Ocean; Ustinova studied 
climatic variability in ice coverf and other features in Tatar Strait; Park investigated long-term trends in sea 
surface temperature in the South China Sea; Hannah presented an overview of and recent results in the World 
Class Tanker Safety Initiative in British Columbia; Trusenkova presented analyses of model simulations of 
deep currents in the Japan/East Sea; Lobanov discussed the analysis of observations showing the cascading of 
dense water along the Peter the Great Bay slope; and Suga discussed spatially intensive observations from a 
biogeochemical mooring that was part of the western North Pacific Integrated Physical-Biological Ocean 
Observation Experiment.
High-frequency motions like internal tides and associated vertical mixing, and sub-mesoscale phenomena 
presented by some speakers are important issues for marine ecosystems, although the speakers did not consider 
any ecosystem implications. PICES needs to pay more attention to these topics.
The best early career scientist presenter award in a POC-related session was given to Michael G. Jacox (co￾authors Andrew M. Moore, Christopher Edwards and Jerome Fiechter) for his talk “Climate variability and the 
3-dimensional structure of coastal upwelling” in the POC Paper Session. The best poster award was given to 
Ho-Jeong Shin (co-authors Ken Caldeira, Chan Joo Jang and Yong Sun Kim) for “Regional efficacy of ocean 
heat uptake under a CO2 quadrupling” in Topic Session S10 [See the end of Sessions Summaries for a list of 
all presentation awards.].
--- PDF PAGE 38 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 38
List of papers
Oral presentations
Observations of turbulence in the summer East China Sea
Naoki Furuichi, Hironori Higashi, Hiroshi Koshikawa, Toru Hasegawa, Kou Nishiuchi and Haruya Yamada
Properties of internal tides and vertical mixing observed on the continental slope of the southwestern East Sea
Seongbong Seo, Young-Gyu Park,Jae-Hun Park, Chang-Soo Hong, Dong Guk Kim and Jae-Hak Lee
Second-mode semi-diurnal internal tides on the continental slope of the southwestern East/ Japan Sea
Hee-Yeol Lee,Jae-Hun Park, Chanhyung Jeon, Seongbong Seo,Young-Gyu Park and Sung-Dae Kim
Investigation of wave processes on the eastern shelf of Sakhalin Island influenced by tidal currents (Sea of Okhotsk)
Evgeniya Maryina and Margarita Grishina
Climate variability and the 3-dimensional structure of coastal upwelling
Michael G. Jacox, Andrew M. Moore, Christopher Edwards and Jerome Fiechter
Vertical motions of fluid particles near Mesoscale Ocean eddies and the effect of submesoscales
Yeon S. Chang and Young-Gyu Park
Simulating water-borne disease transmission among salmon farms in the Discovery Islands, Canada
Michael Foreman, Kyle Garver, Dario Stucchi, Ming Guo, Peter Chandler, John Morrison and Darren Tuele
On the physical and biological interactions between coastal and open sea waters
VadimNavrotsky,ValeriyLiapidevskii,VyacheslavLobanov,ElenaPavlovaandFedorKhrapchenkov
Improvement and seasonal variations of sea surface salinity data in the East Sea derived from Aquarius/SAC-D images
Jin-Wook Lim, Sang-Woo Kim, Chung-Il Lee and Hee-Dong Jeong
Sea surface height variability from satellite altimetry and pressure-recording inverted echo sounders in the North 
Equatorial Current region
Chanhyung Jeon,Jae-Hun Park, Dong Guk Kim, Eung Kim, DongchullJeon and D. Randolph Watts 
Decadal changes of pCO2 and ocean acidification in the Western Arctic Ocean
Zhongyong Gao, Liqi Chen, Heng Sun, Zhenglin Xiao and Di Qi
Variability of the flow through the Kerama Gap between the East China Sea and the Northwestern Pacific induced by
mesoscale eddy activities
Hanna Na, Jae-Hun Park, Mark Wimbush, Hirohiko Nakamura, Ayako Nishina and Xiao-Hua Zhu
Simulation of river runoff in Eastern Siberia and the propagation of this river water in the Arctic
Viktor Kuzin, Gennady Platov, Elena Golubeva and Natalya Lapteva
Features of climatic variability in the Tatar Strait (Japan/East Sea)
Elena I. Ustinova and Yury D. Sorokin
Long-term warming trend of sea surface temperature in the South China Sea
A-Ra Choi, Young-Gyu Park and Jae-Hun Park
An overview of the oceanographic component of the World Class Tanker Safety Initiative 
Charles Hannah, Patrick Cummins, Michael Foreman, Diane Masson, Pramod Thupaki, Svein Vagle and Di Wan
Modeling of deep currents in the Japan/East Sea
Olga Trusenkova
Cascading of dense water along Peter the Great Bay slope in the northwestern Japan Sea
Vyacheslav Lobanov, Aleksandr Sergeev, Igor Gorin, Pavel Scherbinin, Aleksandr Voronin, Dmitry Kaplunenko, Oleg Popov,
Timofei Gulenko and Svetlana Ladychenko
Western North Pacific Integrated Physical-Biogeochemical Ocean Observation Experiment: Summary of the intensive 
observation around the biogeochemical mooring S1 (S1-INBOX)
Toshio Suga, Ryuichiro Inoue, Shinya Kouketsu, Shigeki Hosoda, Taiyo Kobayashi, Kanako Sato, Hiroyuki Nakajima, Makio
Honda, Tetsuichi Fujiki, Kazuhiko Matsumoto, Takeshi Kawano and Toshiro Saino
Poster presentations
Regeneration of a warm anticyclonic ring by cold water masses within the western subarctic gyre of the North Pacific
Sachihiko Itoh, Ichiro Yasuda, Hiromichi Ueno, Toshio Suga and Shigeho Kakehi
Properties of altimetry-derived transport of the Oyashio on the A-line, off the southeastern coast of Hokkaido, Japan
Hiroshi Kuroda, Taku Wagawa, Yugo Shimizu, Shin-ichi Ito, Shigeho Kakehi, Takeshi Okunishi, Sosuke Ohno and Akira Kusaka
Distribution and seasonal variation of the halocline in the world ocean
Hiromichi Ueno and Katsura Yasui
--- PDF PAGE 39 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 39
Vertical structure of current velocity measured by a lowered acoustic Doppler current profiler in the southwestern part 
of the East Sea in July 2005
Chang-Woong Shin and Dong Guk Kim
Observation of an anticyclonic warm core eddy east of Japan
Vincent Faure, Ryuichiro Inoue, Shinya Kouketsu, Toshio Suga, Shigeki Hosoda and Kanako Sato
Variation of Sea Surface Salinity on the Southwestern coast of the East Sea since the first half of the 20 Century
Hee Dong Jeong, Sang Woo Kim, Jin Wook Lim, Yong Kyu Choi, Jeong Min Shim, Kee Young Kwon and Yong Hwa Lee
Hydrological factors in Prostor Bay (Iturup Island, the Sea of Okhotsk) influencing Pacific Salmon during their early 
marine life stage
Kirill Kivva and Sergey Lapin
Recent climatic tendencies over the Kamchatka Peninsula and adjacent waters
Lubov N. Vasilevskaya, Olga A. Shkaberda and Elena I. Ustinova
Summer surface salinity variability in the yellow and East China Seas: ENSO effects
Chan Joo Jang and Taewook Park
Changes in seasonal air temperatures and precipitation in the Far North-East of Russia
Julia V. Stochkute and Lubov N. Vasilevskaya
Processes leading to the second-year cooling of the 2010-12 La Niña event, diagnosed using GODAS
Licheng Feng, Rong-Hua Zhang, Zhanggui Wang and Xingrong Chen
Coordinated international activities on the climate study of ocean-atmosphere interactions
Nico Caltabiano and Valery Detemmerman
Cyclone statistics in northwest Pacific and relationships with climate factors
Wei Lixin, Ting Qin, Bin Cheng and Timo Vihma
FIS Workshop (W1)
Dynamics of pelagic fish in the North Pacific under climate change
Co-sponsored by the International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like Species in the North Pacific 
Ocean (ISC)
Co-Convenors: Gerard DiNardo (USA), Suam Kim (Korea), Sei-Ichi Saitoh (Japan), Cisco Werner (USA)
Invited Speaker:
Patrick Lehodey (Space Oceanography Division, CLS, France)
Background
The goal of the workshop was to initiate a discussion of the scientific framework needed to assess the 
dynamics of pelagic fish under climate/environmental variability. We discussed the overlapping PICES and 
ISC science missions as well as possible elements of a future multi-year joint effort. Climate variability affects 
pelagic fish distributions and migration, and ultimately pelagic fisheries. The level of impact depends on the 
persistence, direction, and magnitude of the variability. Survival and growth rates of pelagic fish are linked to 
oceanographic conditions, and changes to these conditions can have dramatic impacts on the composition of 
species assemblages within pelagic ecosystems, as well as the persistence and magnitude of individual pelagic 
fish populations. Understanding the links between environment and pelagic fish behavior, growth, recruitment, 
and production are paramount to understanding and ultimately predicting the impacts of climate variability. 
Commercially and ecologically important pelagic fishes occupy surface waters of the North Pacific Ocean, 
from coastal shelf to open ocean ecosystems. Many of these species undertake large-scale feeding, spawning, 
and ontogenetic migrations linked to seasonal changes in water masses. For example, Pacific bluefin tuna use 
waters off Japan as a nursery habitat, undertaking an ontogenetic movement eastward to waters off North 
America where they remain as subadults for 2–3 years. Additionally, many pelagic species have environmental 
thresholds and preferences that limit the spatial distribution of a species. The most important environmental 
factors include oxygen, salinity and temperature, and because these factors generally exhibit persistent 
--- PDF PAGE 40 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 40
spatiotemporal patterns, the general distribution of pelagic fishes is known. Knowledge of these relationships 
allows for the incorporation of climate change into stock assessments, which forms the basis for fisheries 
management.
Summary of the workshop
The 1.5 day workshop was held on October 16–17 in Yeosu, Korea immediately preceding the PICES-2014 
Annual Meeting. The workshop was co-convened by Drs. Gerard DiNardo (USA), Suam Kim (Korea), Sei￾Ichi Saitoh (Japan) and Cisco Werner (USA). A total of 22 participants attended the workshop and 11 
presentations were made. The session started with a brief introduction of the workshop goals and objectives, as 
well as future expectations.
An invited talk by Patrick Lehodey reviewed the spatial Eulerian ecosystem and population dynamics model 
SEAPODYM, and its application to several tuna species (Pacific skipjack, yellowfin, bigeye and swordfish, 
and south Pacific and North Atlantic albacore). Gerard DiNardo presented the structure and function of ISC, as 
well as current stock assessment modeling structures used to assess highly migratory species (HMS) stock 
status and condition. Suam Kim reviewed the structure of PICES, summarized the routine processes to form 
expert groups, and provided details on the function, membership and leadership of various Expert Groups 
(including Sections, Working Groups, Advisory Panels and Study Groups among others) using existing 
examples within PICES. Cisco Werner presented a review of the CLIOTOP (CLimate Impacts on Oceanic 
TOp Predators) and related programs (http://www.imber.info/index.php/Science/Regional￾Programmes/CLIOTOP) and discussed the present state of predictive capabilities for the dynamics of top 
predator populations and oceanic ecosystems that combines fisheries and climate (i.e., environmental) effects. 
Enrique Curchitser discussed advances and present capabilities of basin-scale modeling, focusing on the links 
between physical and ecosystem components, from lower trophic levels (biogeochemistry, primary and 
secondary producers) through to the spatially explicit inclusion of fish populations and fishing fleets. Cisco 
Werner presented the results of a study by Dr. Steve Teo and colleagues that examined the relationship 
between observed spatial and temporal patterns in albacore tuna catch-per-unit-effort (CPUE) and 
oceanographic conditions in North Pacific open-ocean and coastal waters. Joon-Taek Yoo reported on 
differences in the abundance and growth of larval Pacific anchovy relative to sea temperatures in waters off 
southern Korea. Gerard DiNardo presented the results of a study by Anela Choy using an Ecopath with Ecosim 
(EwE) model for the response of micronekton to climate-induced variability in the area of the central North 
Pacific occupied by the Hawaii-based pelagic longline fishery. Daisuke Hasegawa presented results from an 
examination into the causes for the historically low catch of blue marlin off the south east coast of Ryukyu 
Islands in December 2012, suggesting a possible link between meanders caused by large low-pressure areas at 
the northern edge of the North Pacific Sub-Tropical Counter Current system. Eunjung Kim presented results 
from a simulation study on the distribution of skipjack tuna in relation to Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs) 
during ENSO. Ari Shin reported on the influence of environmental factors on the biology and catch of Pacific 
Bluefin tuna in waters adjacent to Jeju Island using Korean fishery statistics coupled with climate and 
oceanographic information.
After the oral presentations, a group discussion focused on the requirements to establish a joint ISC-PICES 
research program to assess the dynamics of pelagic fish under climate/environmental variability and 
integration of the dynamics into stock assessment models.
Workshop recommendations 
With a goal of establishing a joint ISC-PICES cooperative science plan to enhance our understanding of 
pelagic ecosystems and advance fishery stock assessment models, participants recommended the formation of 
a one-year Study Group to:
▪ Improve the understanding of the science activities of each organization;
▪ Identify collaborations within PICES scientific committees and expert groups that will complement the 
proposed Study Group, and be consistent with FUTURE;
--- PDF PAGE 41 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 41
▪ Identify areas of common interest;
▪ Develop a framework for cooperation between ISC and PICES that lists categories of joint activities and 
the rational for each, including the benefits to each organization from the joint activity.
List of presentations
Oral presentations
An ecosystem and optimisation framework for fish population dynamics assessment under the influence of fishing and
climate (Invited)
Patrick Lehodey, Inna Senina, Anne-Cecile Dragon, Anna Conchon, Olivier Titaud, John Hampton, Simon Nicol, Teja Arief
Wibawa, Beatriz Calmettes, John Sibert, Hidetada Kyiofuji, Mélanie Abécassis, Olga Hernandez and Philippe Gaspar
The International Scientific Committee for Tuna and Tuna-like Species in the North Pacific Ocean
GerardT.DiNardo
Review of PICES/FUTURE and relation to ISC
Suam Kim
A review of CLIOTOP and related research programs in the North Pacific
Francisco E. Werner
Modeling the Pacific Ocean: Present capabilities and challenges for the next decade in relation to pelagic ecosystems
Enrique Curchitser
Oceanographic influences on albacore distribution in the Northeast Pacific: Importance of open ocean and coastal frontal 
zones
Steven L.H. Teo, Yi Xu, Karen Nieto, Sam McClatchie and John Holmes 
Abundance and growth of larval Pacific anchovy in different water masses and relationship between its growth and sea 
temperature in the southern waters of Korea
Joon-Taek Yoo and Su-Kyung Kim
Projected responses of the central North Pacific pelagic ecosystem to climate-induced changes in micronekton 
communities
C. Anela Choy, Phoebe Woodworth-Jefcoats and Jeffrey J. Polovina
Prominent meanders of the Sub-Tropical Counter Current and pelagic fish catch
Daisuke Hasegawa, Satoshi Mitarai and Koichi Hirate 
Simulation study on the distribution of skipjack tuna in relation to Fish Aggregating Devices (FADs) during ENSO
Eunjung Kim and John R. Sibert
The relationship between ecological characteristics of Pacific bluefin tuna (Thunnus orientalis) fisheries and 
environmental factors around Jeju Island
Ari Shin, Sang Chul Yoon and Suam Kim
FIS Workshop (W2)
Linkages between the winter distribution of Pacific salmon and their marine ecosystems and how this 
might be altered with climate change
Co-sponsored by the North Pacific Anadromous Fish Commission (NPAFC)
Co-Convenors: James Irvine (Canada/NPAFC), Elizabeth Logerwell (USA/PICES)
Invited Speakers:
Katherine (Kate) Myers (University of Washington, USA)
Hiromichi Ueno (Hokkaido University, Japan)
Background
In 2014, a formal framework developed by the joint PICES-NPAFC Study Group on Scientific Cooperation in 
the North Pacific Ocean was endorsed by both organizations http://www.pices.int/members/study_groups/SG-
--- PDF PAGE 42 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 42
SC-NP.aspx. The framework identified two major scientific topics of joint interest to NPAFC and PICES:
▪ Effects of climate change on the dynamics and production of Pacific salmon populations; and
▪ Oceanographic properties and the growth and survival of Pacific salmon.
Summary of the workshop
Approximately 25 people heard 11 oral presentations and contributed to active discussions throughout the day.
In the first invited presentation, Dr. Kate Myers, speaking on behalf of scientists from the USA, Canada, 
Japan, and Russia described Pacific salmon and steelhead: life in a changing winter ocean. Dr. Myers 
reviewed major research findings from salmon research in the high seas from the 1950’s through to the present 
time. She recommended the development of databases to house winter survey biological and catch data as well 
as relevant ocean conditions and suggested that NPAFC and PICES could collaborate on developing 
quantitative multispecies, multistage models to help identify key factors influencing winter distribution, 
thereby improving our understanding of potential future climate change effects.
In the second invited presentation, Dr. Hiromichi Ueno described findings by Japanese researchers 
investigating temporal and spatial variations in growth factors of Pacific Salmon. Dr. Ueno explained the 
importance of eddies in the Gulf of Alaska in advecting nutrients off shore. Predatory zooplankton densities,
indicators of salmon prey abundance, varied in association with PDO in most areas. In the Bering Sea, these 
modelled densities were consistent with salmon catches, and appeared to be correlated with estimates of 
salmon carrying capacity.
Dr. Jim Irvine reviewed the critical period concept for Pacific salmon in a presentation by Dr. Marc Trudel and 
himself. This concept, developed by Dr. Hjort 100 years ago, does not appear to have been adequately tested 
and Drs. Trudel and Irvine proposed an approach to do so, applying it to coho salmon from the Strait of 
Georgia. Evidence provided suggested that the early marine period was critical, but later periods in life may 
not be, at least for these fish.
Although Dr. Svetlana V. Naydenko was unable to attend, Dr. Alex Zavalokin was able to give her detailed 
presentation summarizing Russian winter research on salmon in western north Pacific. Pink and chum salmon 
catches were strongly dependent on western subarctic circulation patterns. Both species were caught to depths 
exceeding 100m and pink salmon were more surface orientated at night than during the day. Food was found to 
be not limiting during winter/spring and salmon fed on a wide variety of prey.
Dr. Sonia Batten described findings from pioneering work by Dr. David Welch on thermal limits of salmon. 
Seasonal southern limits for the distribution of steelhead, sockeye, pink, chum, coho, and Chinook salmon may 
be at the point where food availability just supports temperature-determined metabolic processes. Large areas 
of the North Pacific are projected to be lost to salmon as a result of global warming. The impact of warming is 
likely to be most severe for west coast North American stocks. As distributions shift into the Bering Sea in 
response to warming, it is unclear whether the migration of salmon returning to southern areas will be impeded 
by the Alaskan Peninsula. Experiments with archival tags are a potential means of evaluating how return 
migration pathways are affected by SST.
Dr. Shigehiko Urawa summarized results from winter surveys in the North Pacific and Bering Sea in his 
presentation on the winter distribution and trophic conditions of chum and pink salmon and how these may be 
altered with climate change. Interestingly, the SSTs where pink and chum have been caught were caught were 
relatively consistent within locations among winters, but the fish caught in the Gulf of Alaska were in 
consistently warmer waters than those in the western North Pacific. Ocean age-1 chum salmon had much lower 
lipid contents than older fish, suggesting critical conditions of young fish during their first winter. The total lipid 
contents of chum and pink salmon in the Gulf of Alaska were significantly lower than those in the western NPO. 
The degree of impact of future climate warming may differ among regional stocks and ages of salmon.
--- PDF PAGE 43 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 43
Dr. Alex Zavolokin described factors affecting the winter mortality of pink salmon from the Okhotsk Sea. Data 
from fish produced from the 2007 and 2008 spawning years were examined, the first brood year having a low 
marine survival and the second a much higher survival. Scale circuli spacings were measured for juvenile fish 
in the fall and maturing pink salmon the following summers. For low surviving progeny of the 2007 spawning, 
mean circuli spacings of juvenile pink salmon were lower than those of maturing salmon, while for salmon 
from the better surviving next year, circuli spacings were similar for juvenile and maturing salmon. This 
suggests that the low survival of fish in the first year was the result of high mortalities of slow growing 
salmon. Similar second year growth rates of both brood years implied that the high mortality the first year was 
not due to starvation, but perhaps predation.
Dr. Ed Farley’s presentation on the Impact of climate variability and change on winter survival 
of Bristol Bay sockeye salmon was given by co-author Dr. Phil Mundy. The sizes of juvenile sockeye salmon 
were strongly correlated with back-calculated sizes of juvenile sockeye salmon from adults (survivors) that 
returned to Bristol Bay 2 and 3 years later. Results suggested that juvenile sockeye salmon that reached ~ 180–
250 mm in length during late summer had a 50 percent chance of survival through adulthood; juvenile sockeye 
salmon were <115 mm had less than a 5% chance of survival. Evidence supported climate driven control of 
sockeye salmon populations in Bristol Bay through mechanisms operating in the marine environment during 
winter. Climate drivers likely interact with other factors to determine year class strength.
In the final presentation of the workshop, Dr. Shoshiro Minobe provided preliminary projections of changing 
habitat of suitable sea surface temperature (SST) for salmon using climate model outputs from the Coupled 
Model Intercomparison Project Phase 5 (CMIP5). Using SST data from a 2011 publication, Dr. Minobe 
described effects of climate warming on zooplankton and salmon habitats with a model not available to the 
earlier researchers. Similar findings were nevertheless found as in the earlier publication – salmon will migrate 
to the north and west due to SST warming; effects may be larger during spring-autumn than winter; Chinook 
salmon may be impacted the most while Coho and Steelhead may benefit at least initially from warming; and 
sockeye are expected to decrease. Dr. Minobe plans to re-run this model with more precise salmon habitat 
descriptions (temporally and spatially).
Several presentations from the workshop are expected to be presented at the 2015 NPAFC Symposium on 
climate effects on Pacific salmon, further evidence of the benefits of collaborations between NPAFC and 
PICES scientists.
--- PDF PAGE 44 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 44
List of papers
Oral presentations
Pacific salmon and steelhead: Life in a changing winter ocean (Invited)
Katherine W. Myers, James R. Irvine, Elizabeth A. Logerwell, Shigehiko Urawa, Svetlana V. Naydenko, Alexander V. 
Zavolokin and Nancy D. Davis
Temporal and spatial variation in growth factors of Pacific Salmon
Hiromichi Ueno, Moeko Otani, Maki Noguchi Aita, Michio J. Kishi and Masahide Kaeriyama
Is winter a critical period for Pacific salmon? A critical review of the “critical-period” hypothesis
Marc Trudel and James R. Irvine
Russian research on winter dwelling of Pacific salmon in the central and western parts of the Subarctic Front zone
Svetlana V. Naydenko
Distribution of Pacific salmon in the North Pacific Ocean and adjacent seas, with particular emphasis on winter
David W. Welch, Yukimasa Ishida, Kazuya Nagasawa and Sonia Batten
Distribution and trophic conditions of chum and pink salmon in the North Pacific Ocean during winter under climate
change
Shigehiko Urawa, Toshiki Kaga, Tomonori Azumaya, Shunpei Sato, Masa-aki Fukuwaka and Terry Beacham
Winter mortality of Okhotsk Sea pink salmon in the ocean
Alexander V. Zavolokin and Elena V. Strezhneva
Impact of climate variability and change on winter survival of Bristol Bay sockeye salmon
Edward Farley, Greg Ruggerone, Phil Mundy, Ellen Yasumiishi and Beverly Agler 
Does physical environmental variation influence winter salmon habitat?
Shoshiro Minobe
MEQ Workshop (W3)
Mitigation of harmful algal blooms: Novel approaches to a decades long problem affecting the viability
of natural and aquaculture fisheries
Co-Conventors: Ichiro Imai (Japan), Changkyu Lee (Korea), Charles Trick (Canada), Mark Wells (USA)
Invited Speaker: 
David Kidwell (National Ocean Service, NOAA, USA)
Background
Harmful Algal Blooms (HABs) have substantial economic, societal, and human health impacts in coastal
waters worldwide, from equatorial to high latitude environments. Our increasing reliance on the economic
services of coastal waters is threatened by the apparent increasing frequency and severity of HABs globally.
Currently, clay dispersal in Korean waters is the only pragmatic operational program for mitigating HAB
effects on coastal aquaculture operations. The trade-off, namely smothering of benthos with rapid
sedimentation of clays, is not acceptable in many nations, leaving them with few if any mitigation strategies.
The aim of the workshop was to develop independent evaluation of mitigation strategies that are effective,
transformative and sustainable for individual PICES member countries, and to provide a framework to
advance the scientific collaborations and funding strategies to move mitigation research into the 20th century.
On October 17, 2014, the Section on Ecology of Harmful Algal Blooms convened a workshop dedicated to 
understanding the possible methods of the mitigation of HAB events. Historically S-HAB has considered 
factors concerning the taxonomy, toxicity and environmental factors that lead to the formation of HABs but 
often society requests a means to mitigate existing or established blooms. 
--- PDF PAGE 45 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 45
The session was attended by about 25 individuals representing all PICES member countries. Many early 
career scientists attended the workshop and actively presented their work and participated in extensive 
discussions.
Mr. David Kidwell (invited) from the US National Ocean Services) was the first speaker. This division of 
NOAA was established as an interagency task force with the mandate to advance the study, detection and 
mitigation of HAB events in US coastal waters. Mr. Kidwell provided the particpants with a broad 
understanding on the limits and risks of mitigation. By using examples, he helped to define the levels of 
acceptable activities within the legal framework of the coastal resources. It became important to understand 
that there was a considerable gap between the practical and legal activities of mitigation and the visions and 
activities of researchers. One key take home message is that the vision of research activities needs to fall 
within the legal options for the research to be valuable. “Enlightened” research options can be valuable and 
successful but will never provide the needed mitigation if protocols exceed the regulatory limits.
Mr. Kidwell summarized the procedures that are currently in use. If funding for mitigation comes from the US 
government, the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) standard must be met. NEPA considers the 
environmental impacts of proposed mitigation actions (along with a wide range of environmental 
perturbations) and helps review reasonable alternatives to those actions. Each project or protocol is then 
ranked. There are 3 levels of rankings to meet NEPA requirements:
a. Categorical exclusion (CE) – the researcher must indicate that significant impacts are not likely. 
b. Environmental assessment (EA) – the researcher must indicate that significant impacts possible. 
c. Environmental impact statement (EIS) – the researcher indicates that significant impacts likely. 
Each resulting ranking establishes the level of pre- and post-mitigation that must be followed. The amount of 
analysis, effort and public engagement increases greatly between CE and EA. Environmental impact 
statements (EIS) can take years just to be able to perform the mitigation and thus needs to be avoided for both 
pragmatic (blooms are not that long lasting) and financial considerations. 
The most well understood example of active mitigation projects was the provision of clay flocculation – a 
process that binds the plankton cells and deposits them to the sediments where the cells decompose. Even 
though this is the most common approach to bloom mitigation there are clear unknowns related to this 
protocol. This type of project must consider water quality and standards of the Clean Water Act – a daunting 
task. Other unknowns include the needed size of the operation, the supply of the clay and the composition and 
size of the clay aggregates. There may also be issues of the quality of the clay (contribution of trace metals to 
the water). The clay method is only useful in shallow waters. This brings out its own consequences. 
Sedimentation-based protocols must also consider habitat factors by maintaining a 100 m buffer around coral 
reefs, bird and turtle nesting areas, wetlands, submerged aquatic vegetation beds, etc. There are also a number 
of longer-term monitoring requirements are required.
Individual participants contributed strongly to the session. Kyung Ha Lee (Korea) shared his work using 
addition of a predator that would consume the HAB species – reducing the biomass through consumption and 
respiration. His talk “Feeding by the heterotrophic protists on the red-tide ciliate Mesodinium rubrum”
documented the role of a single-celled ciliated protozoan predator. Predator and prey growth and ingestion 
rates were determined in the lab, yet the efficiency of the predation in a bloom situation remains unknown. 
Also unknown is the eventual sink of the eaten/uneaten cells and whether anoxia could be the highly 
undesirable final product. 
The third example protocol could be the addition of viruses to control the integrity of cells in a mono-specific 
bloom. There are several established unknowns in this protocol most deal with uncertain efficiencies and Mr. 
Kidwell indicated that even at their highest attack efficiency the viral attach usually remains spatially localized 
and not effective throughout the bloom.
--- PDF PAGE 46 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 46
Natsuko Nakayama (Japan; “Prospect for the biological control of Heterocapsa circularisquama bloom by 
inoculating frozen bottom sediment with viruses”) used frozen sediments containing viruses to control 
Heterocapsa circularisquama blooms. Virus can be maintained in sediment for 2 years and there was 
significant reduction in the survivor of the natural bloom species. The process was encouraging and extensive 
debate on whether adding new biological agents was deemed feasible under current regulations. 
JinJoo Kim et al. (Korea; “Isolation and physiological characterization of a new algaecidal virus infecting a 
harmful dinoflagellate, Prorocentrum minimum”) summarized viruses affecting a number of HAB organisms 
representing different groups. Here they documented 6 genera of phycodnaviruses – groups of viruses 
infecting eukaryotic algal hosts from both fresh and seawater. Ecologically, all of the genera are important 
ecological components in aquatic environments. In addition, the presenters provided practical advice of 
preparing virus for possible use in HABs mitigation - such as virus storage at 4°C appears to be best for virus 
longevity, whereas freezing is very ineffectual in providing long term viral stock storage. 
Imai et al. (Japan; “Biocontrol of harmful flagellate biomass blooms by utilization of harmless diatoms 
through germination of resting stage cells in coastal sea”) reintroduced the participants with the work of Pratt 
(1966) In Narragansett Bay. In this older study, the undesirable fish killing species, Heterosigma akashiwo, 
only bloomed when diatoms were scarce. They concluded that by seeding the waters with diatoms, the 
diatoms would outcompete the fish-killing species and there would be no negative bloom formed. Their 
findings were promising, but the method needs to be repeated and optimized. For example, at what stage of 
the bloom is seeding by the competing species most effective? In addition, does initiating a diatom bloom 
result in unconsumed biomass that results in reduced oxygen? There was also a concern that after the diatom 
bloom, particularly if the biomass remains in the water column, alternative species such as EDABs might form 
– certainly an unintended consequence.
The theme of phytoplankton competition was also considered in the presentation by An Suk Lim (Korea; 
“Inhibition of swimming speed and growth of the harmful dinoflagellate Cochlodinium polykrikoides by 
diatoms”). Diatoms often replace Cochlodinium blooms in its declining stages. In the experimental model 
presented the goal was to explore possible negative effects of diatoms (Skeletonema costatum, Thalassiosira 
decipiens, Chaetoceros sp.) on the growth of C. polykrikoides. In the competition, some diatoms physically 
reduced the migration of Cochlodinium, presumably inhibiting access to the nutrients below the thermocline. 
Other species directly had an impact on growth rates and swimming speeds – but the mechanism is not clear.
In contrast to mitigating existing blooms, Chang-Hoon Kim (Korea; “Removal of aquaculture discharges 
responsible for HABs development by the polychaete-assisted integrated culture”) provided extensive 
examples on how, using alternative trophic species, blooms vcan be managed by managing the formation of 
primary producers and their consumption by co-managed species. This setup is a preemptive approach to 
nutrient management and thus removes the possibility of unused nutrients to initiate a bloom that needs to be 
managed. In the example systems an additional high quality bi-product (polychaetes) will be formed. The 
polychaete assisted integrated culture, either in a flow through and semi-recirculation system, improved water 
quality significantly. To initiate the cycle, polychaetes were fed fish feces, uneaten feed, and commercial diet 
– products that would have eventually been oxidized to nutrients that would feed the bloom-forming species. 
It is a management plan that would assist in the control of nutrients through the management of nutrient flow.
Douding Lu (China) provided the final presentation titled “Heterosigma akashiwo blooms in stratified water of 
the East China Sea”. Here, he reported that H. akashiwo blooms are associated with stratified water in East 
China Sea (spring 2011). The process of H. akashiwo bloom development differs from massive Prorocentrum
blooms. Flagellate blooms may become more frequent in coming years as pelagic seed banks serve as 
incubators of massive blooms and the water column becomes presumably more stable. Discharge from dams 
(pattern) has changed over the past several years. This may change the nutrient ratios in the Yangtze River and 
nearby coastal areas. Wild fish kills occurred due to Heterosigma in North China Sea several years ago. 
--- PDF PAGE 47 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 47
As a group, alternatives were discussed:
1. One variant of the clay addition that was discussed was the suspension of sediments to create a highly 
turbid pelagic water column, adsorbing to and removing cells or contribution fresh viruses to inhibit cell 
growth. This procedure certainly has a direct negative effect on the benthic species. There were some 
unknowns. Was the sediment as stick as the clay? Did suspension of the sediments just release the stored 
nutrients into the euphotic zone – thus ensuring that a bloom would initiate?
2. Is it possible to design a surfactant or polymer that might be specific and useful for certain blooms? This 
may allow us to get around the problem that there is impact of clay on benthos. This new compound 
should be economically viable. A compound that has a short half-life and is cheap is ideal. This would be 
an ideal application for NEPA considerations.
3. At present there are chemical methods to bloom mitigation. Each one comes with a significant risk and 
concern. We remain unclear what the known unknowns are with regards to chemical methods (inorganic 
and organic), e.g. “phoslock”, hydrogen peroxide, allelopathic compounds, or barley-extracts (leeches out 
something – a lignin). These chemicals can have serious effects on the ecosystem. Some of these 
methods are expensive. So much of our research is on HAB organisms. Key to success is our need to 
know what impact these compounds has on non-HAB species. Also unknown is the concentration and 
timing of preparations. Also critical is the need to know the impact of the additions on species of economic 
importance (aquaculture) that are likely close-by. 
Advances in biological methodology were also discussed. While there are many great ideas, there is 
considerable risk. This type of treatment often does not differentiate between native and HABs. Some 
positive thoughts involved the application of native algaecidal bacteria. As native species whose life depends 
on the balance of nutrient input and consumption, the use of viruses and predators concerned many 
participants, as these organisms appear to be less predictable or “controllable”.
List of papers
Oral presentations
Can harmful algal bloom mitigation make the problem worse? Complying with United States environmental laws to 
advance HAB control and mitigation research (Invited)
David M. Kidwell and Susan Baker
Feeding by the heterotrophic protists on the red-tide ciliate Mesodinium rubrum
Kyung Ha Lee, Hae Jin Jeong, Eun Young Yoon, Se Hyeon Jang, Hyung Seop Kim and Wonho Yih
Prospect for the biological control of Heterocapsa circularisquama bloom by inoculating frozen bottom sediment with 
HcRNAV viruses
Natsuko Nakayama, Shinichi Kondo, Naotsugu Hata, Yuji Tomaru, Masami Hamaguchi, Keizo Nagasaki and Shigeru Itakura
Isolation and physiological characterization of a new algicidal virus infecting a harmful dinoflagellate Prorocentrum 
minimum
JinJoo Kim, Chang-Hoon Kim, Young-Sang Suh and Tae-Jin Choi
Biocontrol of harmful flagellate biomass blooms by utilization of harmless diatoms through germination of resting stage 
cells in coastal sea
Ichiro Imai, Yumi Imai, Takuma Toda, Kazuyoshi Miyamura, Makoto Noda, Ken-Ichiro Ishii and Takashi Nakanishi
Removal of aquaculture discharges responsible for HABs development by the polychaete-assisted integrated culture 
system
Parandavar Hossein, Sung-Kyun Kim, Byung-Kwon Kim, Kyeong-Hun Kim and Chang-Hoon Kim
Inhibition of swimming speed and growth of the harmful dinoflagellate Cochlodinium polykrikoides by diatoms:
Implications for its red tide
An Suk Lim, Hae Jin Jeong, Tae Young Jang, Se Hyeon Jang and Peter JS Franks
Heterosigma akshiwo blooms in stratified water of the East China Sea
Douding Lu, Xinfeng Dai, Dongrong Li, Ping Xia and Weibing Guan
--- PDF PAGE 48 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 48
MONITOR Workshop (W4)
Networking ocean observatories around the North Pacific Ocean
Co-sponsored by Ocean Network Canada
Co-Convenors: Kenneth Denman (Canada), Jack Barth (USA), Jae Hak Lee (Korea), Robert Weller (USA), 
Hidekatsu Yamazaki (Japan)
Invited Speaker:
Holger Brix (Institute of Coastal Research, Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht, Germany)
Background
Around the North Pacific Ocean, various coastal ocean observatories are operating or under development. 
These observatories include cabled systems as well as integrated observing systems that employ buoys, AUVs, 
gliders, moorings, satellite imagery, and other observing tools. In addition there exist several long-term time 
series programs, and the Argo drifter program. The primary objective of the workshop was to bring together 
operators of these observatories to discuss how to make progress on the following issues:
▪ set up plans for coordinated data sharing, data standards, common sampling protocols, and open access on 
the Internet;
▪ set out a timeline for developing an integrated (nearly) real-time synthesis of observations in the North 
Pacific by linking coastal and open ocean observatories as well as Argo;
▪ define a specific science challenge/question that could be best addressed through a network of observing 
systems in the Pacific Ocean;
▪ discussion on requirements for assimilating data from ocean observatories into multidisciplinary models.
Most of these facilities are regional and coastal in scope, making PICES the ideal organization to host such a 
workshop. The need for such a network of observing facilities was articulated in the conference description of 
the recent Joint PICES/ICES Workshop on “Global assessment of the implications of climate change on the 
spatial distribution of fish and fisheries” held in May 2013 in St. Petersburg, Russia: "… observations and 
model projections (are) needed to develop a global synthesis of the implications of climate change on fish and 
fisheries". 
Between 15 and 20 people attended the workshop (W4). There were seven presentations, followed by a 
discussion on common issues and the need for a group that would meet annually, and recommendations for 
how to form such a group. Ocean Networks Canada was a co-sponsor of the Workshop.
Summary of the workshop
The session consisted of one invited 30-minute talk and six contributed 20-minute talks, summarized here in 
order of presentation.
Jae Hak Lee from the Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology described ‘The status of ocean 
monitoring in Korea’. He first reviewed Korean real time ocean monitoring activities stressing the coastal 
oceans and the integration of many different observing platforms, including a Geostationary Ocean Color 
Imager launched in 2010. Coverage is 8 times/day over an area 2500 km by 2500 km centered over Korea, 
with resolution of 500 m by 500 m. Contributing to international programs, Korea has launched 302 Argo 
floats since 2001 – in the East Sea/Sea of Japan, the Pacific Ocean, and the Southern Ocean – of which ~75 are
still active. In the OceanSites program, Korea currently maintains three sites: 1 in the East Sea/Sea of Japan, 
and two sites in the equatorial western Pacific. Korea is experimenting with subsea and wave gliders, and with 
deep and bio Argo drifters.
--- PDF PAGE 49 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 49
Jack Barth from Oregon Statue University, USA presented a ‘Ten-year retrospective of the Northwest 
Association of Networked Ocean Observing Systems (NANOOS)’ on behalf of Jan Newton (Executive 
Director) and many other NANOOS colleagues. NANOOS is one of ~10 regional components of the US 
Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS). The five highest stakeholder priorities for NANOOS are: 
maritime operations, ecosystem impacts (including hypoxia and HABs), fisheries, mitigating coastal hazards, 
and climate (including ocean acidification). Major observational systems include HF radar for mapping surface 
currents and waves, buoys in the Pacific Northwest, buoys and moorings in the Columbia River estuary and 
Puget Sound, long term coastal glider programs, and monitoring beach and near-shore bathymetry. In order to 
meet the different data delivery needs of a variety of user groups, much effort has gone into development of 
the online NANOOS Visualization System (NVS), including the NVS Data Explorer.
Mary Grossmann from the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, Japan described the OIST Cabled 
Teleopertional Observatory Performing Undersea Surveillance (OCTOPUS), a new coastal observatory 
deployed since August 2013 at about 20 m on a coral reef in the nearshore zone off Okinawa. In addition to 
measuring standard oceanographic and biochemical variables, the focus is on biological imaging with several 
cameras, a passive hydrophone (for cetaceans and vessel traffic). Results were presented from the Continuous 
Plankton Imaging System (CPICS), a fixed station Visual Plankton Recorder, deployed in cooperation with 
Scott Gallager of Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (USA): 5-minute counts of six predatory plankton 
groups show day-night transitions, and hourly counts of 10 classes of plankton show strong presence-absence 
changes with the passage of two typhoons during October 2013.
Hidekatsu Yamazaki of the Tokyo University of Marine Science and Technology, Japan described the Joint 
Environmental Data Integration System (JEDI), which employs novel observational and modeling 
technologies to evaluate multi-scale variations of pelagic marine communities and biodiversity under the 
influence of the Kuroshio and internal waves in coastal habitats. JEDI includes deployment of a cabled 
observatory and a moving AUV platform MEMO-pen. The cabled observatory, the Oshima Coastal 
Environmental data Acquisition Network System (OCEANS), was deployed from Oshima Island southwest of 
Tokyo Bay. Also conducted in cooperation with Scott Gallager of WHOI, OCEANS employs a full suite of 
physical, biological and chemical instrument systems operating from an underwater cabled node. The AUV 
has a specially-designed low vibration propulsion system with a pump jet system rather than a rotating 
propellor, which allows microstructure turbulence measurements and use of a plankton microscope camera 
(CPICS). Measurements are interpreted in the context of a high resolution numerical model of the area that 
shows spatial and temporal patterns of internal waves at tidal frequencies in the vicinity of Oshima Island.
Holger Brix (with Burkard Baschek) from the Institute of Coastal Research, Helmholtz-Zentrum Geesthacht, 
Germany, presented an invited talk on the multi-platform Coastal Observing System for Northern and Arctic 
Seas (COSYNA), mostly focused on the German Bight in the North Sea west of Hamburg. The mission of 
COSYNA is the development and testing of analysis systems, consisting of observations and numerical 
modelling, for the operational synoptic description of the environmental status of the North Sea and of Arctic 
coastal waters. COSYNA aims to provide knowledge tools that can help authorities and other stakeholders to 
manage routine tasks, emergency situations and evaluate trends. Types of observations include i) point 
measurements including buoys, fixed stations and underwater nodes, ii) surface transects on ferries with 
FerryBox systems and on research vessels, iii) 3D transects with SCANFISH and gliders, and iv) mapping of 
spatial fields using optical remote sensing (satellite) and radar (HF and X-band). Several of these systems and 
example observations were presented. Examples of the comparison of regional model results and 
measurements were presented. The end-to-end sensor to user(s) data flow chart was presented as well as a 
description of the COSYNA Data Portal. Two applications were presented – offshore ‘windparks’ and hunting 
gyres with 3D real time mapping. One outreach project of COSYNA is the Global Coast to link expertise from 
different coastal observatories around the globe.
Kim Juniper from Ocean Networks Canada (ONC) located at the University of Victoria gave a talk on ‘Cabled 
ocean observatories as tools for studying biodiversity change’. He presented six Essential Biodiversity
Variables (EBVs) developed by the Biodiversity Observation Network of the Group on Earth Observations 
--- PDF PAGE 50 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 50
(GEO BON): Genetic composition, species populations, species traits, community composition, ecosystem 
function, and ecosystem structure. Information on all of these variables except the first can now be obtained 
from cabled observatories. He then presented a number of examples of EBV studies at ONC cabled sites 
around Vancouver Island and in the Canadian Arctic. Time-series video imagery coupled with oceanographic 
sensors are used to study temporal and spatial changes in benthic community composition and ecosystem 
processes in a variety of near-bottom environments: i) hydrothermal vent sulphide worms, ii) a epibenthic 
megafaunal community in a submarine canyon, iii) epibenthic community responses to severe hypoxia in a 
coastal inlet, iv) surface-sediment bioturbation rates over a fixed area, and v) seasonal faunal dynamics at a 
shallow coastal Arctic site. He concluded with two issues that require attention: First, the need for more 
efficient tools to extract biological data from imagery (ONC has a growing archive of over 10,000 hours of HD 
video imagery), which include computer algorithms for automated counting of fish and other animals, and 
‘citizen science’ using a video game ‘Digital Fishers’ to ‘pre-analyze’ hundreds of video clips. Second, the 
opportunity for collaboration between ocean observatories using EBVs as a tool for structuring biological 
observations between different research groups.
Jack Barth from Oregon State University gave a talk on ‘Using autonomous underwater gliders to observe 
continental margins and oceanic boundary currents’. His results were from the California Current upwelling 
system, one of four major coastal upwelling systems representing only 1% of global ocean surface area but 
more than 20% of wild caught seafood. Some summers over the Oregon shelf, hypoxia develops at depths 
below 30 m causing stress and mortality to sea life. To monitor changes in upwelling and hypoxia, AUV 
gliders equipped with a CTD and sensors for dissolved oxygen, chlorophyll and CDOM fluorescence, light 
backscatter and depth-averaged velocity, have been traversing a cross-shelf section twice per week since April 
2006. Up to September 2014, there have been 3485 glider-days, and 260,190 vertical profiles covering a 
horizontal distance of over 82,000 km. The gliders have documented upwelling episodes, development of 
upwelling fronts, subsurface hypoxia and buoyant fresh water plumes from the Columbia River, etc., even 
during the passage of severe storms that generated 10-m seas. There are plans to add new sensors, including 
bioacoustics.
Discussion 
During the discussion following the presentations, a number of common issues emerged, which include:
▪ Excepting dissolved oxygen, biochemical sensors continue to be unreliable for long term deployment.
▪ For groups who make much of their data available online in ‘nearly real time’, there appears to be no 
common automated quality control-quality assurance techniques.
▪ Groups who make much of their data available online in ‘nearly real time’ need to develop effective 
methods for correcting/calibrating the data, after they have been post initially, and for notifying users of 
these data corrections/updates.
▪ The usual manner in which data are presented on-line for researchers is completely inadequate for 
‘operational’ users of the data – fisheries managers, environmental quality managers, controllers of safe 
marine traffic and transport, etc. How different groups attempt to adapt their data displays to their users’ 
needs differs from group to group – again sharing experiences can lead to development of common ‘best 
practices’.
▪ There is a general sense that obtaining funding for developing and installing ocean observatories is easier 
than maintaining funding for operating the facilities, partially because we have underestimated the human 
resources required for long term operation and data management, e.g., operating gliders continuously over 
many years, rather than for limited time ‘missions’.
Recommendation and response
There was broad agreement that the ‘operators’ of coastal observing system around the North Pacific would 
benefit from meeting on a regular basis and developing an evolving set of ‘best practices’ – basically sharing 
experiences on ‘what works and what does not work’, and working towards common data formats such as 
NetCDF file formats, etc.
--- PDF PAGE 51 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 51
Our formal recommendation was to propose that the PICES MONITOR and TCODE committees set up an 
Advisory Panel for Developing Best Practices and Common Data Protocols for Coastal Ocean Observing 
Systems (AP-COOS). Such a structure would allow this AP to hold focused workshops at PICES on topics like 
those identified above under Discussion Issues. Once this working format has been established, it may be 
advisable to make contact with similar entities within ICES and IOC.
The proposal was considered by the PICES Governing Council at the end of the 2014 Annual Meeting. 
Council approved the establishment of an Advisory Panel on North Pacific Coastal Ocean Observing System 
(AP-NPCOOS), under direction of the Technical Committee on Monitoring (MONITOR) and Technical 
Committee on Data Exchange (TCODE). Initial Terms of Reference have been drawn up: the Advisory Panel 
will have Co-Chairs – one from the western N. Pacific and one from the eastern N. Pacific, with 2-4 members 
from each Contracting Party. The Terms of Reference include: 1. Develop and advise about best practices for 
coastal ocean observing systems; 2. Convene workshops/sessions to engage those involved in coastal ocean 
observing systems from around the North Pacific; and 3. Advise on linkages between coastal ocean observing 
systems and both PICES activities (e.g., FUTURE Science Program, North Pacific Ecosystem Status Report) 
and open-ocean observatories (e.g., Argo).
List of papers
Oral presentations
The status of ocean monitoring in Korea
Jae Hak Lee
Ten-year retrospective of the Northwest Association of Networked Ocean Observing Systems (NANOOS)
Jan A. Newton, John A. Barth, David L. Martin, Michael P. Kosro, Jonathan Allan, Emilio Mayorga and many NANOOS 
Colleagues
OIST Ocean Cube, a new coastal cabled observatory in Okinawa, Japan
Mary M. Grossmann, Satoshi Mitarai and Scott M. Gallager
Joint Environmental Data Integration System: JEDI System
Hidekatsu Yamazaki, Scott Gallager, Hayato Kondo and Kunihisa Yamaguchi
COSyNA, the Coastal Observing System for Northern and Arctic Seas – A regional, European perspective and the global 
coast (Invited)
Holger Brix and Burkard Baschek
Cabled ocean observatories as tools for studying biodiversity change
S. Kim Juniper and Fabio De Leo
Using autonomous underwater gliders to observe continental margins and oceanic boundary currents
John A. Barth
Poster presentation
NEAR-GOOS Cross-Basin Climate Monitoring Section: First results of a pilot project 
Vyacheslav Lobanov, Sho Hibino, Dmitry Kaplunenko, Aleksandr Lazaryuk, Toshiya Nakano, Satoshi Ogawa and Pavel
Tishchenko
POC Workshop (W5)
SOLAS into the Future: Designing the next phase of the Surface Ocean-Lower Atmosphere Study within 
the context of the Future Earth Program
Co-sponsored by the Surface Ocean Low Atmosphere Study (SOLAS)
Co-Convenors: Minhan Dai (China), Lisa Miller (Canada), Yukihiro Nojiri (Japan)
Background
For more than a decade, the Surface Ocean-Lower Atmosphere Study (SOLAS) has fostered cutting-edge
research in air–sea interactions, promoting communication, coordinating and directing research, and
advocating for new projects. SOLAS has facilitated major advances, changing fundamental understanding in
--- PDF PAGE 52 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 52
a number of subjects, including the significance of ocean acidification, the roles of dimethylsulfide (DMS)
and marine organic matter in atmospheric chemistry, and the importance of sea-ice biogeochemistry in 
controlling air–sea exchange. At the same time, the significance of earth system science to society has become
increasingly apparent, and Future Earth is replacing the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme as a 
major SOLAS sponsor. Within this context, SOLAS is plotting a new course for the next 10 years. This 
workshop is one of a number at various conferences that is soliciting community input into the future of
SOLAS. In particular, we are asking the question: In a world where Earth system science is coming under
increasing political and public scrutiny, what is and should be the contribution of SOLAS science to society?
Ideas and conclusions from this and other, similar workshops will be incorporated into the new SOLAS 
Science Plan.
Summary of the workshop
The convenors were quite pleased with the participation in this workshop, which had 11 people, allowing for 
some useful conversations. There was a good mix of people who were completely unfamiliar with SOLAS 
and those who were involved in the early stages of the program but were not aware of the organization's 
current directions. Therefore, we met our goal of obtaining additional insights from the community. Among 
the most important points to come out of the conversation were:
▪ The production of clouds and aerosols by marine communties are an important global-scale ecosystem 
service provided by the ocean, and those feedbacks are not yet understood;
▪ Observatories are the only way to get information at high wind states (a major failure of the first phase of 
SOLAS), and SOLAS should determine what equipment/observations should be added to observatories 
(fleets of wave gliders?) to facilitate SOLAS science;
▪ The rates and horizontal scales of processes in atmospheric and oceanic boundary layers are extremely 
different , and this scale mismatch between ocean and atmospheric measurements has not been adequately 
addressed;
▪ When considering what society is going to need from us in a couple of decades, SOLAS should put more 
emphasis on geoengineering issues, as SOLAS is the community best equipped to evaluate the 
effectiveness of ocean-based geoengineering strategies; in particular, our current capacity to evaluate 
aerosolization effects is much less than for ocean fertilization;
▪ More consideration needs to be given to identifying local areas where new studies would most effectively 
improve our global perspective; 
▪ The shift of SOLAS’ focus away from DMS and toward organic aerosols as climate controllers is 
appropriate, because although DMS plays a number of important physiological and ecological roles, more 
than 20 years of intensive research has not conclusively shown a direct climate link. Future research on 
DMS cycling should focus on the locations where new measurements would fill the gaps in the 
climatologies, and on identifying which processes are actually most important in the global sulfur cycle.
W6 participants
Jack Barth (USA)
James Christian (Canada)
Ken Denman (Canada)
Chuanlin Huo (China)
S. Kim Juniper (Canada)
Dong-Jin Kang (Korea)
Lisa Miller (Canada)
Yukihiro Nojiri (Japan)
JeongHee Shim (Korea)
Toru Suzuki (Japan)
Lixin Wei (China)
--- PDF PAGE 53 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 53
Best Presentations for Committee/Program-sponsored Topic Sessions or Workshops at PICES-2014
Science Board Best Oral Presentation (S1) on “Pathways of Arctic Ocean acidification”
Emanuele Di Lorenzo (School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, USA, 
edl@gatech.edu) on “Forecasting North Pacific climate and ecosystem changes: Advances and challenges” co-authored 
with Nathan Mantua and Mathew Newman
Science Board Best Poster Presentation (S1) on “Pathways of Arctic Ocean acidification”
Chan Joo Jang (Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology (KIOST), Ansan, Republic of Korea, cjjang@kiost.ac) 
on “Interannual variability of chlorophyll associated with mixed layer depth changes in the East Sea (Japan Sea)” co￾authored with Youngji Joh and Sinjae Yoo
Best Oral Presentation by an early career scientist for the BIO-sponsored Contributed Paper Session 
Jaeyong Bae (Pukyong National University, Busan, Republic of Korea, samael318@gmail.com) on “Population structure 
and life history of Neomysis awatschensis (Crustacea: Mysidae) in Jeju Island, Korea” co-authored with Wongyu Park
Best Poster for the BIO-sponsored Contributed Paper Session
Ah-Ra Ko (Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology, Ansan, Republic of Korea, scrooge85@kiost.ac) on 
“Tracking seasonal dietary shift of Euphausia pacifica in the Yellow Sea using stomach contents and lipid biomarkers” co￾authored with Se-Jong Ju and Hye Seon Kim
Best Oral Presentation by an early career scientist for the FIS-sponsored FIS Topic Session (S5) on “Ecosystem considerations in 
fishery management of cod and other important demersal species”
Zhe Li (Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan, lz880526@live.cn) on “Effects of temperature and ontogeny on vertical 
movement ability of newly hatched larvae of the Pacific cod Gadus microcephalus” co-authored with Jun Yamamoto and 
Yasunori Sakurai
Best Poster for the FIS-sponsored FIS/FUTURE Topic Session (S6) on “Climate change impacts on spatial distributions of 
marine fish and shellfish”
Yang Liu (Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan, yangliu315@hotmail.co.jp) on “The impacts of marine environment 
change on sustainable aquaculture model for Japanese scallop in southern Hokkaido and Aomori prefecture, Japan using 
RS/GIS and OGCM” co-authored with Sei-Ichi Saitoh, Christopher Mulanda Aura and Toru Hirawake
Best Oral Presentation by an early career scientist for the MEQ-sponsored Contributed Paper Session
Andrew Jin Yi Loh (Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology (KIOST), Geoje, Republic of Korea, 
andrew@kiost.ac) on “Comparison of oil exposure methods to filter feeding bivalve” co-authored with Un Hyuk Yim, Sung 
Yong Ha, Joon Geon An and Won Joon Shim
Best Poster for the MEQ-sponsored MEQ Topic Session (S8) on “Marine debris in the ocean: Sources, transport, fate and effects 
of macro- and micro-plastics”
Mi Jang (Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology (KIOST), Geoje, Republic of Korea, jangmi@kiost.ac) on 
“Expanded polystyrene buoy as a moving source of toxic chemicals to marine life: Enrichment of hexabromocyclododecanes 
in mussels” co-authored with Sang Hee Hong, Manviri Rani, Gi Myoung Han, Young Kyoung Song and Won Joon Shim
Best Oral Presentation by an early career scientist for the POC-sponsored Contributed Paper Session 
Michael G. Jacox (University of California Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz, U.S.A., mikejacox@gmail.com) on “Climate 
variability and the 3-dimensional structure of coastal upwelling” co-authored with Andrew M. Moore, Christopher Edwards 
and Jerome Fiechter
Best Poster for the POC-sponsored POC/TCODE/FUTURE Topic Session (S10) on “Regional climate modeling in the North Pacific”
Ho-Jeong Shin (Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology (KIOST), Ansan, Republic of Korea, 
hojeong.shin@gmail.com, hjshin@kiost.ac) on “Regional efficacy of ocean heat uptake under a CO2 quadrupling” co￾authored with Ken Caldeira, Chan Joo Jang and Yong Sun Kim
--- PDF PAGE 54 ---
Session Summaries-2014
Session Summaries 54
Best Oral Presentation by an early career scientist for the MONITOR-sponsored POC/MONITOR Topic Session (S9) on
“Variability in advection and its biological consequences for Subarctic and Arctic ecosystems”
Hiroko Sasaki (Graduate School of Fisheries Science, Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan, 
hiro_sasaki@salmon.fish.hokudai.ac.jp) on “Spatial and temporal changes of zooplankton community in the Chukchi Sea” 
co-authored with Kohei Matsuno, Atsushi Yamaguchi, Yutaka Watanuki and Takashi Kikuchi
Best Poster for the MONITOR-sponsored Topic Session 
None this year.
Best Oral Presentation by an early career scientist for the TCODE-sponsored FIS/TCODE/FUTURE Topic Session (S7) on 
“Recent assessments of climate change impacts on marine ecosystems”
Nina Bednarsek (Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, Seattle, USA, nina.bednarsek@noaa.gov) on “Vulnerability 
and adaptation strategies of pteropods due to ocean acidification and hypoxia” co-authored with R.A. Feely, J.C.P. Reum, 
B. Peterson, J. Menkel, S.R. Alin and B. Hales
Best Poster for the TCODE-sponsored FIS/TCODE/FUTURE Topic Session (S7) on “Recent assessments of climate change 
impacts on marine ecosystems”
Chan Joo Jang (Korea Institute of Ocean Science and Technology (KIOST), Ansan, Republic of Korea, cjjang@kiost.ac) 
on “North Pacific upper-ocean changes projected by CMIP5 models” co-authored with Dongwon Yi, Jihyeon Lee, Ho￾Jeong Shin and Yong Sun Kim