PDF PAGE 1
Plectorhinchus multivittatus (Macleay, 1878)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / Plectorhinchus ordinalis (Scott, 1962).
FAO names: En - Manybanded sweetlips.
Diagnostic characters: Lips fleshy, moderately swollen with age. Chin with 6 pores but no median pit.
Total gill rakers on first gill arch 32 to 35 (12 to 15 on upper limb, 1 at corner, and 18 to 20 on lower
limb). Dorsal fin with XII (rarely XI or XIII) spines and 18 to 21 soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to
touch). Lateral line with about 56 to 58 tubed scales. Colour: blue-grey above, white below; 8 or 9 bright
yellow or yellow-orange longitudinal bands on head, extending onto body and remaining distinct on lower
half, but becoming broken into a series of dots and short bands on upper half of body; 2 distinct rows of
similarly coloured spots along entire length of dorsal fin; all other fins transparent light yellow.
Size: Maximum total length about 50 cm, commonly to 40 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters near reefs. Taken by handline and spear.
Marketed fresh. Uncommon.
Distribution:
Northern Aus-
tralia from Shark Bay to Torres
Straits, and Taiwan Province
of China.
Perciformes: Percoidei: Haemulidae
2977
click for previous page

PDF PAGE 2
Plectorhinchus pictus (Tortonese, 1936)
(Plate XIV, 104)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: Plectorhinchus fangi (Whitley, 1951); Plectorhynchus sinensis
Chu, Wu, and Jin, 1977 / Plectorhinchus cinctus (Temminck and Schlegel, 1843).
FAO names: En - Trout sweetlips; Fr - Diagramme truité; Sp - Burro trucha.
Diagnostic characters: Lips fleshy, moderately swollen with age. Chin with 6 pores but no median pit.
Total gill rakers on first gill arch 20 to 23 (6 to 8 on upper limb, 1 at corner, and 11 to 14 on lower
limb). Dorsal fin with XII spines and 15 to 17 (mostly 16) soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to touch).
Lateral line with about 48 to 58 tubed scales. Colour: greyish brown, most of the body with rounded black
spots about equal in size to interspaces, larger than interspaces in young; pectoral fins olive without spots,
pelvic fins dusky anteriorly without spots or blackish, anal and caudal fins dark brown to blackish, the outer
three-fifths of the caudal fin lighter in juveniles; juveniles have 3 longitudinal brownish bands which may
be broken into blotches and with numerous dark spots about equal to eye diameter between the 2
uppermost bands.
Size: Maximum total length about 60 cm, commonly to 45 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters near reefs. Taken by handline and spear.
Marketed fresh, a small quantity is salted.
Distribution: Gulf of Oman
eastwards along the Indian
coast, Gulf of Manaar, Thai-
land and China.
2978
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 3
Plectorhinchus picus (Cuvier in Cuvier and Valenciennes, 1830)
(Plate XIV, 105 and 106; Plate XV, 107)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: Plectorhinchus punctatissimus (Playfair, 1867) / None.
FAO names: En - Spotted sweetlips.
Diagnostic characters: Lips fleshy,
greatly swollen with age. Chin with 6
pores but no median pit. Total gill rak-
ers on first gill arch 33 to 37 (8 to 13 on
upper limb, 1 at corner, and 22 to 26 on
lower limb). Dorsal fin with XII spines
and 18 to 22 soft rays. Scales ctenoid
(rough to touch). Lateral line with about 62
to 70 tubed scales. Colour: juveniles are
creamy white below, blackish above with
white snout and a pair of white saddles and
spots. Adults become covered with dark brown spots on head, back, sides, and fins; dorsal fin dark brown
to blackish with a median horizontal grey stripe on membranes only and with a series of large black spots
and sometimes with a narrow dark margin; pectoral and pelvic fins with the base and axil vermillion in some
specimens; inside of mouth, hind edge of maxilla, gill-cover membrane and base of pectoral fins vermillion,
scarlet, or red-brown; belly pale mauve grey.
Size: Maximum total length about 85 cm, commonly to 60 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal waters near reefs. Taken by handline and spear. Sometimes
abundant. Marketed fresh, a small quantity is salted.
Distribution: Indo-West Pa-
cific from East Africa, Great
Barrier Reef to southern Ja-
pan and eastwards to the So-
ciety Islands and Rapa.
adult
juvenile
Perciformes: Percoidei: Haemulidae
2979

PDF PAGE 4
Plectorhinchus polytaenia (Bleeker, 1852)
(Plate XV, 108)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Ribboned sweetlips; Fr - Diagramme rubanne; Sp - Burro listado.
Diagnostic characters: Lips fleshy, moderately swollen with age. Chin with 6 pores but no median pit.
Total gill rakers on first gill arch 26 to 29 (7 to 9 on upper limb, 1 at corner, and 17 to 20 on lower
limb). Dorsal fin with XII (rarely XIII) spines and 19 to 22 soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to touch).
Lateral line with about 54 to 60 tubed scales. Colour: brown to yellowish grey with 5 to 9 fairly narrow grey
or white longitudinal stripes outlined with dark brown on body and continuing around snout; fins yellow,
soft dorsal, caudal, and pectoral fins with darker stripes disappearing with age; eye and lips yellowish;
mouth, tongue, and gill rakers scarlet; chin white; juveniles have fins striped and fewer stripes on body.
Size: Maximum total length about 40 cm, commonly to 30 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters near reefs. Taken by handline and spear.
Marketed fresh, a small quantity is salted.
Distribution: Indo-West Pa-
cific from the west coast of
India, Western Australia
northwards to Torres Straits
and to the Philippines.
2980
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 5
Plectorhinchus schotaf (Forsskål, 1775)
(Plate XV, 109)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Minstrel sweetlips; Fr - Diagramme ménestrel; Sp - Burro trovador.
Diagnostic characters: Lips fleshy, moderately swollen with age. Chin with 6 pores but no median pit.
Total gill rakers on first gill arch 26 to 30 (9 to 13 on upper limb, 1 at corner, and 15 to 17 on lower
limb). Dorsal fin with XII (rarely XIII) spines and 18 to 21 soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to touch).
Lateral line with about 54 to 58 tubed scales. Colour: grey, silver, or greyish brown, pale grey to whitish
below; head darker dorsally with opercular membrane crimson, scarlet red to orange-red; base of pectoral
fins dark red; inside of mouth and tongue bright reddish; juveniles sometimes with narrow faint blue lines
on body and below eye; fins usually dark. Freshly caught fish often have irregular broad pale bars and
blotches which disappear after death.
Size: Maximum total length about 90 cm, commonly to 40 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters near reefs. Taken by handline and spear.
Marketed fresh, a small quantity is salted.
Distribution:
Indo-West Pa-
cific from Port St. Johns, Tran-
skei, East Africa to northern
Australia, the Philippines, and
southern Japan. Red Sea
population differs slightly in
coloration.
Perciformes: Percoidei: Haemulidae
2981

PDF PAGE 6
Plectorhinchus vittatus (Linnaeus, 1758)
(Plate XV, 110)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: Plectorhinchus orientalis (Bloch, 1793) / None.
FAO names: En - Oriental sweetlips; Fr - Diagramme oriental; Sp - Burro oriental.
Diagnostic characters: Lips fleshy, greatly
swollen with age. Chin with 6 pores but no
median pit. Total gill rakers on first gill arch
29 to 34 (9 to 11 on upper limb, 1 at corner,
and 20 to 23 on lower limb). Dorsal fin with
XIII (rarely XII or XIV) spines and 17 to 20
soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to touch).
Lateral line with about 55 to 65 tubed scales.
Colour: juveniles have connected black
blotches and spots that gradually break up
into horizontal stripes; pectoral fins black in
juveniles becoming uniform yellow in adults;
tail spotted with age. Adults with 6 to 12 broad
dark brown, blue-brown or black stripes that persist on the belly and join horizontally across the nape and
snout with anterior part of pale interspaces yellow forming 2 bright yellow stripes across interorbital and 2
around snout; eye usually yellow; fins yellow with black margins to vertical fins and black spots, pectoral
fins uniform yellow with red-brown, chocolate, or blackish base, pelvic fins yellow with base red-brown,
scarlet, or dark brown.
Size: Maximum total length about 60 cm, commonly to 40 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters near reefs. Taken by handline and spear.
Marketed fresh, a small quantity is salted.
Distribution: Indo-West Pa-
cific from East Africa to Indo-
nesia, northern Australia,
Thailand, Philippines, and
Polynesia.
juvenile
adult
2982
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 7
Pomadasys argenteus (Forsskål, 1775)
(Plate XV, 111)
GRL
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: Pomadasys hasta (Bloch, 1790) / Pomadasys opercularis
Playfair in Playfair and Günther, 1867.
FAO names: En - Silver grunt; Fr - Grondeur argenté; Sp - Corocoro plateado.
Diagnostic characters: Body depth 2.7 to 2.8
times in standard length. Head blunt, its upper
profile convex; mouth small; maxilla reaching to
eye; teeth in jaws arranged in villiform (brush-like)
bands; 2 pores and a median pit on chin. Dorsal
fin with XII spines and 14 soft rays; anal fin
with III spines and 7 soft rays. Scales ctenoid
(rough to touch); lateral line with 45 to 50 scales;
5 scales between lateral line and dorsal-fin
origin; 21 or 22 scales around caudal peduncle,
9 above lateral line, 10 or 11 below. Swimbladder
without anterior extensions. Colour: juveniles with
body pale brownish, lighter below, back with ir-
regular longitudinal streaks on alternate scale
rows; dorsal fin with dusky membranes; a dark spot on gill cover. Adults with silvery body, dark blotches
on dorsal fin and numerous scattered dark brown to blackish spots on body.
Size: Maximum total length about 60 cm, commonly to 40 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters in open bays and estuaries. Taken by handline,
set net, trap, and spear. Mar-
keted fresh, a small quantity is
salted. From 1990 to 1995, the
FAO Yearbook of Fishery Sta-
tistics reports a range of yearly
catch of 537 to 1 239 t of Po-
madasys argenteus from the
area (Malaysia only).
Distribution: Red
Sea
to
southern Japan, including
northern
Australia
from
Exmouth Gulf to Clarence
River, New South Wales.
juvenile
adult
Perciformes: Percoidei: Haemulidae
2983

PDF PAGE 8
Pomadasys argyreus (Valenciennes in Cuvier and Valenciennes, 1833)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Bluecheek silver grunt; Fr - Grondeur à joues bleus; Sp - Corocoro mejilla azul.
Diagnostic characters: Body depth 2.3 to 2.7 times in standard length. Head blunt, its upper profile
convex; mouth small; maxilla reaching to eye; teeth in jaws arranged in villiform (brush-like) bands; 2 pores
and a median pit on chin. Dorsal fin with XII spines and 13 soft rays; anal fin with III spines and 7
soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to touch); lateral line with 42 to 47 scales; 6 scales between lateral line
and dorsal-fin origin; 18 to 20 scales around caudal peduncle, 7 to 9 above lateral line, 9 below.
Swimbladder more or less truncate anteriorly, without anterior extensions. Colour: body silvery; gill cover
with a large blue-black blotch extending onto opercle and becoming indistinct in adults; peritoneum pale
sandy brown; alimentary canal pale (not black).
Size: Maximum total length about 40 cm, commonly to 25 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters in open bays and on trawling grounds. Taken by
handline, set net, bottom trawl, trap, and spear. Marketed fresh, a small quantity is salted.
Distribution: India, Sri Lanka
to Papua New Guinea, ex-
cluding northern Australia.
2984
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 9
Pomadasys auritus (Cuvier in Cuvier and Valenciennes, 1830)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Longhead grunt.
Diagnostic characters: Body depth 3.2 times in standard length. Head large, its upper profile convex, gill
cover and angle of preopercle lengthened as convex rounded lobes, gill cover extending to above
one-third to one-half of pectoral fins; mouth small; maxilla reaching to eye; teeth in jaws arranged in
villiform (brush-like) bands; 2 pores and a median pit on chin. Dorsal fin with XII spines and 14 soft
rays; anal fin with III spines and 7 soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to touch); lateral line with 43 scales;
5 scales between lateral line and dorsal-fin origin; 16 scales around caudal peduncle, 7 above lateral
line, 7 below. Swimbladder morphology unknown. Colour: body silvery to light burnished gold; dorsal fins
with well defined blackish spots on interspinous membranes; adults with a blackish spot on tip of each
scale on back and upper sides.
Size: Maximum total length about 52 cm; none captured less than 43 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Unknown, perhaps from deeper waters of continental shelf. A rare
species. Specimens wanted by museums.
Distribution:
China, Thai-
land, Singapore, Malaysia,
and New South Wales, Aus-
tralia.
Perciformes: Percoidei: Haemulidae
2985

PDF PAGE 10
Pomadasys furcatum (Bloch and Schneider, 1801)
(Plate XV, 112)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: Rhonciscus furcatus (Bloch and Schneider, 1801) / None.
FAO names: En - Banded grunt; Fr - Goret à six bandes; Sp - Ronco de seis bandas.
Diagnostic characters: Body depth 2.9 to 3 times in standard length. Head profile convex; mouth small;
maxilla reaching to hind nostril or eye; teeth in jaws arranged in villiform (brush-like) bands; 2 pores and
a median pit on chin. Dorsal fin with XII spines and 14 to 16 soft rays; anal fin with III spines and
8 or 9 soft rays; soft portions of dorsal and anal fins with a row of interradial scales. Scales ctenoid
(rough to touch); lateral line with 52 to 54 scales; 8 or 9 scales between lateral line and dorsal-fin origin;
25 or 26 scales around caudal peduncle, 11 above lateral line, 12 or 13 below. Swimbladder without
anteriolateral extensions. Colour: body light purplish brown above, paler below, with about 6 longitudinal
dark stripes that are usually bifurcate anteriorly; the stripes becoming progressively more bifurcate or
double with age.
Size: Maximum total length about 40 cm, commonly to 30 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal waters near reefs. Caught with handlines and gill nets. Marketed
fresh.
Distribution: Malaysia, south-
ern Indonesia, Thailand to
China.
2986
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 11
Pomadasys kaakan (Cuvier in Cuvier and Valenciennes, 1830)
(Plate XV, 113)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / Pomadasys hasta (Bloch, 1790).
FAO names: En - Javelin grunt; Fr - Grondeur javelot; Sp - Corocoro jabalina.
Diagnostic characters: Body depth 2.5 to 3
times in standard length. Head blunt, its upper
profile convex; mouth small; maxilla reaching to
eye; teeth in jaws arranged in villiform (brush-
like) bands; 2 pores and a median pit on chin.
Dorsal fin with XII spines and 13 to 15 (usu-
ally 14 ½) soft rays; anal fin with III spines
and 7 soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to
touch); lateral line with 43 to 50 scales; 7 scales
between lateral line and dorsal-fin origin; 20
scales around caudal peduncle, 9 above lat-
eral line, 9 below. Swimbladder without anteriolateral horn-like extensions. Colour: juveniles brilliant
silvery green above to golden silver on sides and silvery white on belly with 12 or more faint vertical bars
comprised of small dark brown spots or irregular blotches; dorsal fin spotted with black-brown spots on
lower half of spinous dorsal fin and in 3 rows on rayed dorsal fin; margin of soft dorsal fin darker and lower
tip of caudal fin milk white. Adults uniform golden green above, silvery below with traces of the vertical
bars present only when alive and spots on dorsal fins indistinct or absent.
Size: Maximum total length about 80 cm, commonly to 45 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters in open bays and estuaries, penetrating rivers to
the upper limit of brackish water. Taken by handline, set net, trap, and spear. Marketed fresh, a small
quantity is salted or smoked.
Distribution: Indo-West Pa-
cific from Transkei to Red
Sea, Persian Gulf, India, Indo-
nesia to China (including Tai-
wan Province), including
northern Australia from
Exmouth Gulf to Moreton Bay.
adult
subadult
Perciformes: Percoidei: Haemulidae
2987

PDF PAGE 12
Pomadasys maculatus (Bloch, 1793)
(Plate XV, 114)
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Saddle grunt (= blotched grunt, Fishing Areas 57/71); Fr - Grondeur selle; Sp - Corocoro
montura.
Diagnostic characters: Body depth 2.3 to 2.7 times in standard length. Head blunt, its upper profile
convex; mouth small; maxilla reaching to eye; teeth in jaws arranged in villiform (brush-like) bands; 2 pores
and a median pit on chin. Dorsal fin with XII spines and 13 to 15 soft rays; anal fin with III spines
and 7 (rarely 6 or 8) soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to touch); lateral line with 50 to 55 scales; 7 to 9
scales between lateral line and dorsal-fin origin; 22 to 25 scales around caudal peduncle, 9 or 10
above lateral line, 11 or 12 below. Colour: silvery grey, head purplish or brownish, nape and back with
a series of incomplete cross bars (one on nape most conspicuous); spinous part of dorsal fin with a large
black blotch; dorsal and caudal fins edged with black, other fins yellowish.
Size: Maximum total length about 50 cm, commonly to 15 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters in open bays, trawling grounds, and estuaries.
Taken by bottom trawl, handline, set net, trap, and spear. Frequently abundant on prawn trawl grounds.
Marketed fresh, a small quantity is salted or smoked.
Distribution: East coast of
Africa, Madagascar, Red
Sea, Gulf of Aden, Persian
Gulf, Pakistan, India, Sri
Lanka to northern half of Aus-
tralia from Shark Bay to More-
ton
Bay,
New
Guinea,
Philippines to southern Ja-
pan.
2988
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 13
Pomadasys trifasciatus Fowler, 1937
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Blackeared grunt.
Diagnostic characters: Body depth 2.6 to 2.9 times in standard length. Head blunt, its upper profile
convex; mouth small; maxilla reaching to anterior margin of eye or pupil; teeth in jaws arranged in villiform
(brush-like) bands; 2 pores and a median pit on chin. Dorsal fin with XII (rarely XIII) spines and 13
(rarely 12 or 14) soft rays; anal fin with III spines and 7 soft rays. Scales ctenoid (rough to touch);
lateral line with 43 to 50 (usually 47) scales; 6 scales between lateral line and dorsal-fin origin; 19 to
23 scales around caudal peduncle, 8 to 10 above lateral line, 9 to 11 below (mostly 9 above, 2 close
to, and 11 below, lateral line). Colour: juveniles with 3 dark stripes, the middle one wide, becoming faded
or absent with growth; a distinct black-brown spot on gill cover; dorsal fins without dark spots or blotches;
adults plain or with faint stripes.
Size: Maximum total length about 15 cm, commonly to 10 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Coastal inshore waters in open bays and mouths of rivers. Taken by
bottom trawl and set net. No
fishery has yet developed.
Abundant on some prawn
trawling grounds.
Distribution: Bay of Bengal
to Sumatra, Bali, Lombok,
northern Australia from
Joseph Bonaparte Gulf to
Bowen, Gulf of Thailand, and
Philippines. Possibly more
widespread.
juvenile
Perciformes: Percoidei: Haemulidae
2989
click for next page
