PDF PAGE 1
1
1. INTRODUCTION 
This catalogue is intended as an identification guide to the threadfin breams (genus
Nemipterus),whiptail breams (genus Pentapodus), monocle breams (genus Scolopsis), dwarf
monocle breams (genus Parascolopsis) and coral breams (genus Scaevius) of the world,
primarily for use in fisheries and fisheries-related studies. Information useful for identification,
as well as details on biology, ecology and catch statistics, where known, are presented for all
of the 62 presently recognized species of nemipterid fishes, regardless of their importance to
fisheries. 
The nemipterids are one of the most important economic groups of marine fishes in the
tropical Indo-West Pacific region, but they are also one of the most taxonomically difficult
families to deal with. The group has been previously reviewed by Fowler (1931 b, 1933),
Weber & de Beaufort (1936) and Akazaki (1959, 1962), but there is little agreement in the
nomenclature of these authors, and classification at the species level has been greatly
confused. Recent reviews of the Nemipterus species of Thailand (Wongratana, 1972, 1974)
and of the western Indian Ocean species of Nemipterus (Russell, 1986a), as well as re-
examination of nemipterid type specimens in the Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris,
(Bauchot et al., 1983) have resolved some taxonomic problems. However, many species
continue to be confused or incorrectly identified in the literature. 
A major problem in resolving the taxonomy of the nemipterids is that many species are similar
in morphology, and separation of taxa has been mainly on the basis of fresh coloration.
Identification from preserved specimens often is difficult, and this has frequently led to
misidentification. Except in the case of a few well-known species, much of our biological
knowledge is tied to names which may not be correct, thus rendering the associated biological
information of doubtful value. Other factors contributing to past confusion have been the
failure of some taxonomists to re-examine type specimens, and also a lack of fresh material.
In the course of the present work, the author has examined a wide range of museum
specimens, including all extant types (the majority of which are in European museums), and
has undertaken extensive field collecting of fresh specimens, mainly from fish markets
throughout the Southeast Asian region. In some cases correct species determination was
possible only by visiting the original type localities to obtain fresh material. 
The taxonomic information provided in this catalogue is based on an on-going revision of the
family Nemipteridae by the author. As such, the catalogue is not intended as a final, definitive
work on the classification of the Nemipteridae, but rather as a state-of-the-art guide which
summarizes taxonomic information to date, and which hopefully will serve as a foundation for
further work. 
Consistent with the format and style of the "FAO Species Catalogue" series, this catalogue
is intended to be as self-contained as possible, and a glossary of technical terms and
illustrations is provided to minimize the necessity to refer to related literature. Literature
citations in the text have been kept to a minimum, and the literature that has been consulted
is listed in the bibliography. 
click for previous page

PDF PAGE 2
2
Acknowledgements 
I extend my gratitude to the following persons and institutions who assisted during museum
visits, and provided specimens or loans of specimens: M.L. Bauchot and M. Desoutter
(Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris); W.F. Smith-Vaniz (Academy of Natural Sciences,
Philadelphia); W.N. Eschmeyer (California Academy of Science, San Francisco); R. Cressey,
S.L. Jewett, L.W. Knapp, V.G. Springer, and J.T. Williams (United Stated National Museum
of Natural History, Washington, D.C.); M.F. Gomon (Museum of Victoria, Melbourne); P.C.
Heemstra (J.L.B. Smith Institute of Ichthyology, Grahamstown, South Africa); D.F. Hoese,
J.M. Leis, M. McGrouther and J.R. Paxton (Australian Museum, Sydney); M.L. Holloway,
P.J.P. Whitehead and A. Wheeler (British Museum, (Natural History), London); G.R. Allen and
J.B. 
Hutchins 
(Western 
Australian 
Museum, 
Perth); 
W. 
Klausewitz 
(Natur-Museum
Senckenberg, Frankfurt); H.K. Larson and R.S. Williams (Northern Territory Museum, Darwin);
K. Matsuura (National Science Museum, Tokyo); R. McKay and J. Johnson (Queensland
Museum, Brisbane); H. Nijssen (Zoologísch Museum, Amsterdam); M. Boeseman and M.J.P.
van Oijen (Rijksmuseum van Natuurlìjke Historie, Leiden); H.J. Paepke (Museum for
Naturkunde, Berlin); J.E. Randall and A.Y. Suzumoto (B.P. Bishop Museum, Honolulu); A.D.
Lewis (Ministry of Fisheries, Fiji); T. Gloerfelt-Tarp (FAO, Bali); R. Winterbottom (Royal Ontario
Museum, Toronto); P. Last, G. Leyland, I.S.R. Munro and K. Sainsbury (CSIRO Fisheries
Research Division, Hobart); P. Kailola (Fisheries Research Station, Kanudi, Port Moresby, and
University of Adelaide, South Australia); P. Sirimontaporn (National Institute of Coastal
Aquaculture, Songkhla, Thailand); A. Nateewathana (Phuket Marine Biology Centre, Phuket,
Thailand); T. Wongratana (Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok); M. Adrim and S. R. Suharti
(Centre for Oceanological Research and Development, Jakarta); S.-C. Lee (Academia Sinica,
Institute of Zoology, Taipei); O. Okamura (Kochi University, Japan); T. Iwai (Kyoto University,
Japan); B. Chernoff (Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago); C. Lee (Agriculture and
Fisheries Department, Hong Kong); F. Woerner (GTZ, Lombok); A. Ben-Tuvia (Hebrew
University, Jerusalem); P. Wongrat (Katsetsart University, Bangkok); N. Mirza (Marine Fisheries
Department, Karachi); P. Sukhavisidh (Marine Fisheries Department Laboratory, Bangkok); A.
Chuan Gambang (Marine Fisheries Department, Kuching, Sarawak); the late R. Hacker, and H.
Ahnelt (Naturhistorisches Museum, Vienna); H.-W. Khoo (National University of Singapore);
M. Kulbicki and J. Rivaton (ORSTOM, Noumea); C. Jones (Queensland Fisheries Service,
Cairns, Australia); K. Mochizuki and Y. Tominaga (University Museum, University of Tokyo,
Japan); D. Manikyala Rao (ANR College, Andra Pradesh, India); H. Wilkens (Zoologisches
Museum, Hamburg); T.J. Indra (Zoological Survey of India, Madras). 
I am grateful to W. Fischer of FAO who secured support for museum visits and field collecting
work through the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, and whose
endeavours have made possible this catalogue. The initial part of this work was undertaken
with the support of a CSIRO (Australia) Postdoctoral Fellowship to the Smithsonian Institution,
Special thanks are due to G. R. Allen, T. Gloerfelt-Tarp, R.H. Kuiter, A.D. Lewis, J.E. Randall,
D. Tuma, K. Sainsbury (CSIRO) and R. Steene, who made available their colour transparencies
of nemipterid fishes, and to the illustrators, T. Wongratana, O. Lidonnici and P. Lastrico who
prepared the drawings for this catalogue. 
Finally, I thank FAO staff for making the final editing session both successful and enjoyable. 
Washington, D.C. 

PDF PAGE 3
 
3 
1.1 Plan of the Catalogue 
A family description is given, followed by a key to genera. The species accounts are arranged 
alphabetically by genera and species. Each genus is introduced with its type reference and 
synonyms. Descriptions of genera with more than one species also list diagnostic features and 
comments on general biology, habitat, distribution, and interest to fisheries. The genus 
descriptions are followed by a key to the species and species accounts in alphabetical order.
The  information pertaining to each species is arranged by paragraphs, in the order listed below:  
(1) Scientific Name : The reference for the original description and type locality is given. 
(2) Synonyms: All invalid names that have been applied are referenced. 
(3) FAO Name: The FAO English name is considered the standard to be used by fishery 
purposes. This should avoid confusion which can be caused by the existence of multiple
names for the same species or the same name for several species. The FAO name is not
intended to supplant the use of local names but rather, to serve as a worldwide reference.
FAO French and Spanish names are not yet available for most species. 
(4) Diagnostic Features: Distinctive characters of the species are given as an aid for 
identification, accompanied by useful diagrams. These diagnoses should be consulted to
confirm species identified using the illustrated key. 
(5) Geographical Distribution: The general geographic range is given in the text and illustrated 
on a map. The map shading includes known areas of occurrence and intermediate areas
between locality records where a species is expected to be found. 
(6) Habitat and Biology: Information on habitat, behaviour, food habits and reproduction is
given, where known. 
(7) Size: Because many nemipterid fishes have filamentous extensions to the caudal fin, the
usual  measurement of size as total length can be misleading. For this reason, the measurement
of size used throughout this Catalogue is standard length (SL) (see Fig. 5). The approximate
maximum size, and the size commonly attained are given throughout in SL. 
(8) Interest to Fisheries: General information on the extent, type of fisheries, and utilization are 
given. Detailed fisheries data are unavailable for all species, and therefore only a qualitative 
assessment is usually possible. 
(9) Local Names: These are given where published names are available. Often, a single local 
name is applied to several species. 
(10) Literature: Only more recent references which contain illustrations that could be useful
for identification are given. It is indicated if an incorrect name is given in the reference. 
(11) Remarks: Useful information which is not appropriately covered in the previous
paragraphs is included here.  Frequently used incorrect scientific names are mentioned here. 

PDF PAGE 4
 
1.2    General Remarks on Nemipterids 
The Nemipteridae are marine perciformes  
that occur in the tropical-subtropical Indo-
West Pacific. They belong to the super-  
family Sparoidea, a monophyletic group   
that also contains the families Sparidae 
(porgies), Lethrinidae (emperor fishes and 
large eye breams - see FAO Species Cata-
logue, Vol. 9) and Centracanthidae (picar- 
els). 
Phylogenetic relationships and classifica-
tion: The limits and relationships of the 
sparoid fishes have been discussed by 
Akazaki (1962) and Johnson (1980). Within 
the Sparoidea, the Nemipteridae are char-
acterized by the presence of a well-devel-
oped, Y-shaped ethmo-maxillary ligament, 
with a branch inserting on the palatine (Fig.  
1). In all other sparoids this ligament is 
reduced or absent. In addition, nemipterids
 
have a large, strap-like ligament running forward from the ectopterygoid to insert by two
separate branches on the maxillary and articular; the adductor mandibulae section A1 is
completely or partially divided into two separate sections, the lower of which lies lateral to A2
(in contrast to lethrinids, in which A1 lies medial to A2); and the ramus mandibular passes
lateral to A2. Nemipterids also have a well-developed opisthotic (lost or fused in all other
sparoids); an accessory subpelvic keel; a post pelvic process; and a subocular shelf. The
posterior predorsal bone (predorsal configuration 0/0/2 + 1/1/) and the second epibranchial
tooth plate also are lost in nemipterids. 
The phylogenetic position of the Nemipteridae is still uncertain, but Johnson (1980) considers
the nemipterids to be more closely related to the lethrinids than to other sparoids. 
The Nemipteridae are recognized here as comprising five genera: Nemipterus, Parascolopsis,
Pentapodus, Scaevius, and Scolopsis (Fig. 2). The taxonomic integrity of These genera has 
been widely accepted, although the validity of Parascolopsis has been challenged by some
authors, who have included this genus within Scolopsis. Preliminary osteological study,
however, indicates a number of significant differences between  Parascolopsis and Scolopsis.
These include differences in jaw structure, development of the infraorbital bones, number of
epipleural ribs and degree of development of the second anal spine. In addition, species of
Parascolopsis generally occur in deeper offshore waters and differ in habitat from Scolopsis,
which typically inhabit shallow reef areas. Pending further analysis of relationships,
Parascolopsis and Scolopsis are therefore retained here as separate genera. 
Taxonomic work on the Nemipteridae is still on-going. Among problems that remain to be
resolved are the taxonomy of the species of the mainly deeper-water genus Parascolopsis.
Specimens of this group are comparatively rare in museums, and additional material is needed
for identification of a number of apparently undescribed species which, because of their
uncertain taxonomic status, are not included here. A revision of the genus Parascolopsis is
planned, and separate papers revising the other nemipterid genera are presently being
prepared. The reader is alerted particularly to forthcoming papers by the author in which the
undescribed species of Nemipterus  and Pentapodus  includ ed here, will be formally described
and named. 
large, 
straplike 
ligament 
palatine 
ethmo-maxillary 
ligament 
premaxilla
adductor 
mandibular 
muscles 
maxillary 
Fig. 1 
Ligaments and muscles associated 
with jaw bones in Nemipterus (from 
Johnson, 1980) 
4
a1
a1
upper
lower
a2

PDF PAGE 5
5
26 species 
10 species 
1 species 
9 species 
16 species 
(S. monogramma) 
(P. inermis) 
(S. milii) 
(P. paradiseus) 
(N. nemurus) 
Nemipterus 
Pentapodus 
Scaevius 
Parascolopsis 
Scolopsis 
NEMIPTERIDAE 
FAMILY                      GENUS 
SPECIES 
Fig. 2   A provisional classification of the genera of the Family Nemipteridae 

PDF PAGE 6
6 
Distribution, Habitat and Biology: The family Nemipteridae is confined to the tropical and
subtropical Indo-West Pacific, and no species occur in the eastern Pacific, Atlantic (the type-
locality of 'Surinam' for Dentex filamentosus Valenciennes [= Nemipterus nematophorus]
appears to be an error for Sumatra), or Mediterranean Sea (a report of N. japonicus as a Red
Sea immigrant into the Mediterranean [Fischer & Whitehead, 1974] has yet to be confirmed).
Three genera, Nemipterus, Scolopsis and Parascolopsis, are distributed widely throughout the
Indo-West Pacific region; the genus Pentapodus is restricted to the West Pacific (including
north-western Australia and western Indonesia); and the monotypic genus Scaevius is endemic
to northern Australia. Nemipterids are marine, bottom-living fishes (records of N. balinensoides
and N. oveniides Popta [= N. peronii] from 'Süsswasser' [fresh water] are very doubtful).
Species of the genus Nemipterus occur on mud and sand bottoms in coastal inshore as well
as offshore shelf waters and range in depth down to about 300 m, although most species
occur in much shallower water. Species of the genus Parascolopsis occur on mud or sand
bottoms mainly in offshore shelf waters in depths down to about 400 m. Species of the genus
Pentapodus are benthic or free-swimming near the bottom, and usually occur on or close to
coral reefs in depths down to 100 m. The monotypic Scaevius milii occurs on reef and shallow
muddy or sand bottoms in inshore areas. Species of the genus Scolopsis occur usually on coral
reefs, or on sand or mud bottoms close to reefs, in depths down to about 60 m. Nemipterids
can be solitary or schooling and do not appear to be territorial. 
Nemipterids are entirely carnivorous fishes and feed mainly on other small fishes, cephalopods,
crustaceans, and polychaetes. Feeding in most species appears to be done during the day.  
Many nemipterid fishes show size-related differences in sex ratios, with small fishes being
mainly females and larger fishes males. In some species this size-related skew in sex ratios
appears to be due to higher growth rates in males. However, histological examination of
gonads indicates that protogynous hermaphroditism may also explain the size-related
differences i n sex ratios in some species. Protogynous hermaphroditism is reported for some
species of Scolopsis. There is evidence of hermaphroditism also in species of Pentapodus and
Nemipterus (Young & Martin, 1985), although species of Nemipterus appear to be non-
functional rudimentary hermaphrodites in which the males have functional testes, but retain
rudimentary ovarian tissue throughout their life (Takahashi et al., 1989). 
There are no reports of courtship or spawning behaviour among nemipterid fishes. Spawning
seasonality varies widely among different species and appears to vary also between localities.
Mature ova are present in species of Nemipterus over a prolonged period, inferring a protracted
spawning season, with usually one or two periods of increased fecundity. 
The eggs and newly-hatched larvae of N. virgatus (Fig. 3) have been described by Aoyama &
Sotogaki (1955), Renzhai & Suifen (1980) and Renzhai (1986). Leis & Rennis (1983) have
described and illustrated larvae of an unidentified nemipterid, probably Pentapodus (Fig. 4).
Eggs of N. virgatus are colourless, buoyant and spherical, measuring 0.71 to 0.79 mm in
diameter (Fig. 3 a-f). The yolk mass measures 0.58 to 0.60 mm in diameter, with an oil
globule of 0.15 to 0.16 mm. Eggs take about 24 hours to hatch. The larvae hatch at 1.5 to
1.8 mm and newly hatched larvae have an elongate body, a small yolk sac, a single oil globule,
unformed mouth, and unpigmented eyes (Fig.3 g). The lower finfold is transparent and only
a few stellate melanophores are present along the ventral margin of the tail region. The body
pigment changes during yolk absorption with branching melanophores appearing on the snout
and front of the yolk mass. At 1.95 mm, the stellate melanophores along the ventral tail region
are increased. By 7 mm spines are not yet present on the head and operculum but the stellate
melanophores remain on the margin of the base of the anal fin and peduncle (Fig. 3 m).
Distinguishing characteristics of nemipterid larvae include 22-24 myomeres, tightly coiled gut,
large head lacking any spines, large eye, and ventral midline pigment (Fig. 4). 

PDF PAGE 7
a) 8 hours, 35 min. 
b) 16 hours, 50 min.         c) 20 hours, 10 min.         d) 20 hours, 30 min. 
 
g) larvae just hatched, 1.7 mm TL 
 
h) 24 hours after hatching, 2.3 mm TL 
i) 48 hours after hatching, 2.5 mm TL 
 
  
I) late postlarva, 5.9 mm SL 
Fig. 3  Early development stages of Nemipterus virgatus
(from Aoyama & Sotogaki, 1955: a to i; Renzhai, 1986: j to m) 
f)    27     hours 
e)  26 hours
k)  prelarva, 4.6 mm SL 
j)  prelarva, 4.16 mm SL 
m) late postlarva, 7 mm SL 
7

PDF PAGE 8
 
8 
Juveniles of Scolopsis species often are
strikingly 
different 
in 
colour 
pattern 
to    
adults, and the juveniles of at least two
species (S. bilineatus and S. margaritifer)
appear to be Batesian mimics (Allen et al.,
1975; Russell et al., 1976; Smith-Vaniz,
1976). The juvenile coloration of these
scolopsids closely resembles poisonous or
noxious blenniid species, and in the case of
S. bilineatus this resemblance even extends 
to geographic subspecies of the blenniid 
(Russell et al.,1976). 
Population dynamics of nemipterids have 
been studied only for species of Nemipterus 
and Scolopsis, and the von Bertalanffy 
growth parameters, asymptotic length (Loo)
and the coefficient of growth (K) are known
for 
populations 
of 
a 
few 
commercially 
important species (for details of growth
parameters 
see 
individual 
species
accounts). 
Fisheries: Threadfin breams, and to a much
lesser extent monocle breams, are an im-
portant 
component 
of 
commercial 
and
artisanal fisheries of the Indo-West Pacific
region. Whiptail breams are of artisanal
fisheries importance in some areas and are
also 
taken 
occasionally 
by 
recreational
fishermen. Dwarf monocle breams, because
of their usually small size and deeper-water
habits are of little fisheries importance. 
Fig. 4 
Larvae of an unidentified nemipterid,
possibly Pentapodus sp. (from Leis &
Rennis, 1983) 
Nemipterids are caught mainly by bottom    
trawl or by handline. Other methods include
longline, gill nets, lift nets, surrounding nets, drive-in nets, fish stakes and traps. Some species
of Scolopsis  also are captured live by hand net for the aquarium trade. Nemipterids are popular
eating fishes and are marketed fresh, dry-salted, dry-smoked, fermented and steamed. Trash
fish are made into fish balls, fish cakes, fish meal and surimi, or used as animal feed. 
Threadfin breams are usually taken in multispecies catches, and often three or more species
of Nemipterus occur in the same trawl. Because of problems of identification, they are rarely
reported as separate species, separate landing statistics are available only for one species
(Nemipterus virgatus), while the remaining catch data are reported under unidentified
Nemipterus species, Scolopsis species, or Nemipteridae (see Table 1). In many areas, species
of Nemipterus are the second or third-most important catch species by weight. The total
catch of nemipterids reported to FAO for 1987 amounted to 128 491 m. tons (FAO Yearbook
of Fishery Statistics, Vol. 64, 1987). However, because of the largely artisanal nature of the
fisheries of some areas and the paucity of landing statistics, the available figures probably
grossly underestimate the actual catch of nemipterids taken in the Indo-West Pacific region. 
a) 3 mm 
b) 4.1 mm 
c) 5.1 mm 
d) 11.5 mm 

PDF PAGE 9
9 
Table 1 
Reported Catch in Metric Tons of Nemipterids by Fishing Areas for 1987 
Fishing areas 
 
51 
57 
61 
71 
Total 
Nemipterus virgatus 
Nemipterus spp. 
Scolopsis spp. 
Nemipteridae 
- 
906 
- 
997 
- 
10 086 
521 
- 
6 220 
23 232 
- 
- 
86 175 
353 
- 
6 200 
120 400 
874 
997 
Total 
1 903 
10 607 
29 452 
86 529 
128 491 

PDF PAGE 10
 
1.3   Illustrated Glossary of Technical Terms and Measurements 
Fig. 5   External morphology and measurements 
Anterior - Relating to the front portion.  
Anus - The external opening of the intestine 
(Fig. 5). 
Axillary scales - The pair of elongate, point-
ed, scales at the base of the pelvic fins (Fig.  
5). 
Bar - An elongate colour marking with verti-  
cal orientation, the sides of which are more    
or less straight. 
Canine - A prominent elongate, curved,    
sharp tooth. In nemipterids, canines are 
usually restricted to the front part of the      
jaws (Fig. 6). 
Caudal peduncle - The narrow end of the 
body between the posterior basal ends of    
the dorsal and anal fins and the base of the 
caudal fin (Fig. 5) 
Cheek, cheek scales - The area between the 
lower part of the eye and the lower limb of 
the preopercle. Species of the genus Nemipt-
erus have 3 transverse rows of cheek scales, 
while other nemipterid species possess 4 to   
6 transverse rows of scales (Fig. 7). 
canines         conical       villiform  
Fig. 6 
Premaxilla of a nemipterid showing 
types of teeth  
 
Caudal fin - The tail fin (Fig. 5). 
Fig. 7 
Cheek scales and preopercle 
measurements 
Compressed - Flattened from side to side; 
refers to relative body width. 
dorsal fin 
soft 
caudal peduncle 
caudal 
filament 
caudal fin 
anal fin
pelvic fin 
standard length 
lateral line 
eye 
diameter 
 
spinous 
snout lenght 
suborbital 
opercle 
preopercle 
head length 
body depth 
pectoral fin 
axillary 
scale
cheek scales 
scaly width 
denticulate 
margin of 
preopercle
naked width 
10
depth
anus

PDF PAGE 11
 
11 
Conical - Cone-shaped; refers to teeth (Fig. 
6). 
Continuous - In actual contact or closely 
adjoining. 
Dentary - The lower jaw bone. 
Denticulate - Having the appearance of teeth 
or teeth-like structures (Fig. 7) 
Dorsal - Toward the back or upper part of
the body. 
Dorsal fin - A median fin along the back. In 
nemipterids, the fin is supported by spinous 
rays anteriorly and soft rays posteriorly (Fig. 
5). 
Dorsal profile - Refers to the upper edge of 
the body in lateral view. 
Dorsal midline - The longitudinal axis along 
the dorsal surface of the body. 
Elongate - Extended; drawn out.  
Emarginate - With the margin slightly hol-
lowed, concave; used to describe the shape  
of the posterior margin of the caudal fin (Fig. 
8). 
emarginate        lunate            forked  
Fig. 8 Types of caudal fins 
Falcate - Scythe-like; long, narrow and 
curved; used to describe the shape usually    
of the upper lobe of the caudal fin (Fig. 9). 
pointed  rounded  elongate  falcate  filamentous   
point 
Fig. 9  Shapes of upper caudal fin lobe 
Fig. 10 Top of head 
Isthmus - The area of the ventral surface 
where the gill membranes meet. 
Lateral - At or towards the side. 
Lateral fine - A series of pored or tubed   
scales forming a fine along the side of the   
body (Fig. 5). The lateral-fine scales are 
counted from the most anterior pored scale 
near the upper end of the operculum to the 
base of the caudal fin which is detected by
the crease which results from folding the fin
forward. 
Lunate - Shaped like a crescent moon; used   
to describe the shape of the caudal fin Fig. 8). 
Maxilla, maxillary - The bone of the upper
jaw lying above the premaxilla (Fig. 11). The
outside surface of the maxilla in nemipterids
can be either relatively smooth (Fig. 11 a), or
have a denticulate ridge (Fig. 11 b). 
interorbital 
width 
Filament, filamentous - Used to describe the 
elongation of the anterior rays of the dorsal
fin or the upper and/or lower lobe of the
caudal fin (Fig. 9). 
Forked - Used to describe a caudal fin shape 
with angular lobes (Fig. 8). 
Gills, gill rakers - Bony arches, covered by 
the operculum, which bear the gill filaments 
posteriorly and the gill rakers anteriorly. In 
nemipterids, the gill rakers are short and 
sparsely covered with tiny spines. Gill raker 
counts are made on the first arch and in-  
clude small rudiments. 
Interobital width - The least distance be-
tween the orbits (Fig. 10). 

PDF PAGE 12
12 
premaxilla 
maxilla 
(smooth) 
premaxilla 
maxilla (with 
denticulate 
ridge) 
a) 
Fig. 11  Jaw bones 
b) 
a) 
b) 
c) 
Median - Pertaining to the middle. 
Meristic - Divided into parts or discrete units;
pertaining to the number of parts as in
scales or fin rays. Meristic characters include
scale counts and fin ray counts. 
Midlateral - The longitudinal axis along the
side of the body. 
Naked - Without scales. 
Nomen nudum - A species name proposed
without 
any 
acceptable 
description 
and
having no taxonomic validity. 
Opercle, operculum - The large bone forming
the upper posterior of the gill cover (Fig. 5). 
 Pectoral fins - The anterior or uppermost of
the paired fins (Fig. 5). 
Pelvic fins - Paired fins behind or below the
pectoral fins (Fig. 5). 
Posterior - The rear or hind portion.  
Position of eye relative to a line drawn from
tip of snout to upper base of pectoral fin -
The lower margin of the eye may be below
(Fig. 12a), tangent to (Fig. 12b) or above
(Fig. 12c) a line drawn from the tip of the
snout to the upper base of the pectoral fin. 
 Premaxilla, premaxillary - The anterior bone
of the upper jaw (Fig. 11). 
Preopercle - Bone on check in front of oper-
cle and forming front of gill cover (Fig. 5).  
Rays - The rigid structures that support the
fin; spinous rays are stiff, unsegmented, and
support the anterior portion of the dorsal and
anal fin; soft rays are segmented, and flexi-
ble and support the posterior portion of the
dorsal and anal fin in nemipterids (Fig. 5). 
Fig. 12   Position of eye relative to a line
between tip of snout to upper
pectoral fin base 
Scales above and below lateral line - A trans-
verse series of scale rows; scales below the
lateral line are counted from the origin of the
anal fin, not including the median scale row,
along a forward diagonal to the lateral line,
but not including the lateral-fine scale; scales
above the lateral fine are counted from the
origin of the spinous portion of the dorsal
fin, including the row of small scales at the
base of the dorsal fin (this is usually listed as
half a scale), on a diagonal backward to the
lateral line, and not including the lateral-fine
row (Fig. 13).
scale rows above 
lateral line 
scale rows below 
lateral line 
Fig. 13     Scale counts above and below lateral
line 

PDF PAGE 13
13 
Snout - The area between the tip of the
upper lip and the anterior margin of the eye.
In nemipterids the snout is measured without
the lip (Fig. 5). 
Soft dorsal - The posterior part of the dorsal
fin which is composed of jointed or soft 
rays. 
Spinous dorsal - The anterior part of the
dorsal fin supported by spines. 
Spot - A more or less circular colour mark-
ing. 
Standard length - The straight line distance
from the tip of the snout, excluding the
upper lip, to a vertical line passing through
the base of the caudal fin (taken to be the
point of flexure of the caudal fin) (Fig. 5). 
Stripe - An elongate colour marking with a 
horizontal or length wise orientation, the  
sides of which are more or less straight.  
Suborbital, suborbital width - The bone be-
neath the eye. In nemipterids this bone has 
a free posterior margin that is smooth, den-
ticulate or bears one or more spines (see Fig.
20). Its lower margin is straight or emar-
ginate. It may be scaly or naked. A line
drawn up from the posterior margin may
reach the dorsal profile before, at or behind
the origin of the dorsal fin (Fig. 14). The
suborbital depth is the distance between the
anterior edge of preorbital bone (can be felt  
at about mid-point of upper jaw, behind lip)
to the lower edge of orbit (Fig. 5). 
line drawn upwards 
from posterior edge 
of suborbital 
Fig. 14   Slope of posterior margin of 
suborbital bone 
Synonym - One or more scientific names
used to denote the same taxon. The first
established scientific name is usually that
which is the accepted name; all other later
established names are junior synonyms. 
Transverse - Crosswise.  
Undulated - Waved. 
Uniform - As applied to coloration, of one 
colour. 
Ventral - Pertaining to the abdomen or lower 
surface 
Ventral midline - The longitudinal axis along 
the ventral surface of the body 
Vertical fins - Fins on the median line of the 
body; the dorsal, anal and caudal fins.  
Villiform - Small, close-set teeth, usually in 
bands. 
click for next page
