Table 3.1 
Species composition for the 28 functional groups of the Java Sea model
a 
No. 
Functional Group 
Species included 
1. 
Benthic producers 
Marine algae (epilithic algae, endolithic algae, reef turf algae, 
benthic fleshy algae, macroalgae, and benthic algae) and 
spermatophytes (sea grass) 
2. 
Phytoplankton 
Dominated by diatoms (Bacteriastrum sp., Biddulphia sp., 
Bacillaria sp., Chaetoceros sp., Coscinodiscus sp., Ditylum sp., 
Eucampia sp., Hemiaulus sp., Hemidiscus sp., Lauderia sp., 
Leptocylindricus sp., Nitzschia sp., Rhizosolenia sp., 
Skeletonema sp., Streptotheca sp., Thalassiothrix 
sp./Thalassionema sp.) and dinoflagellates (Ceratium sp., 
Dinophysis sp., and Peridinium sp.) 
3. 
Small herbivorous zooplankton 
Copepodes, ostracodes, bivalve larvae, cirripedia larvae, 
cladocerans, echinoderm larvae, larvacea, other mollusk larvae, 
and larvacea 
4. 
Large herbivorous zooplankton 
Mysids, sergestids, euphausiids, amphipodes, luciferidae, and 
other decapod larvae 
5. 
Carnivorous zooplankton 
Chaetognaths (Sagitta spp.), annelids and ichthyoplankton 
6. 
Jellyfish 
All medusoid form of cnidarians (hydrozoa and scyphozoa 
only); however, scyphozoan medusae dominates 
7. 
Benthic infauna 
Includes all burrowing benthos of the size < 1.0 mm, viz., 
polychaetes, mollusks, echinoderms, crustaceans, sipunculans, 
and benthic stage larvae of other larger organisms 
8. 
Structure-associated fish (SAF) 
This group is designed to include all biota (notably fish) that 
ecologically depend (directly and/or indirectly) on living bottom 
structure (LBS, see components of group #10) to complete their 
life cycle. For this model, it includes fish of the families 
Balistidae, demersal Carangidae, Lethrinidae, Lutjanidae, 
Pentapodidae, Platacidae, Polynemidae, Sparidae, 
Sphyraenidae, Scaridae, Acanthuridae, and Tetraodontidae 
9. 
Macrozoobenthos 
This group includes all larger (size > 1.0 mm) mollusks and 
echinoderms, such as conch, oyster, scallops, clams, cockles, 
mussels, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, and sea stars 
10. 
Living bottom structure (LBS) 
This functional group comprised of all biogenic organisms that 
live on and/or are attached to the sea floor, such as sponges 
(notably giant cup sponges, viz. Poterion nautilus, P. neptuni 
and P. amphitritae), gorgonians (sea fans and sea whips), soft 
corals, sea pens, sea anemones, etc. 
11. 
Juvenile penaeid shrimps 
This group includes all juvenile shrimps, not just penaeid 
shrimps. However, the parameterization of this group is based 
on the juveniles of Penaeus spp. and Metapenaeus spp. 
12. 
Large pelagic predators (juvenile) 
Juveniles of the families Chirocentridae, large Scombridae, and 
Trichiuridae 
49 
