Though the rhetoric would have it that the trawl ban has resulted in the recovery of the 
heavily exploited ecosystem, there is no data in support of this opinion. The lack of data can 
be attributed, at least in part, to the lingering ill feelings and mistrust of government by the 
artisanal fishers. Several years after the ban was imposed, an attempt was made by a 
government research vessel, equipped with trawl gear, to study the impact of the trawl ban 
on the ecosystem, in particular on the demersal resources (Bailey 1997). However, Bailey 
(1997) reported that the research team was threatened with attack by local fishers, and local 
authorities were unable to guarantee the vessel's safety. Hence, the researchers had to 
abandon their survey. Dwiponggo (1988) also suggested that on top of safety issues, 
budgetary constraints also limit the scientists ability to measure the biological impacts of the 
trawl ban. 
Given the current climate of the government fisheries policies and capabilities (especially the 
lack of law enforcement capability) and the aforementioned problem identification 
(including the absence of studies measuring the biological impacts of the trawl ban), the 
author proposes the following research question: "is it really biologically safe to revoke the 
trawl ban, and furthermore, would it benefit the fisheries ?". The nature of the research 
question requires analyses at the ecosystem scale, using ecosystem modelling and simulation. 
These analyses coupled with an economic impact analysis, extending over time and in the 
context of ecosystem dynamics, will address the issue of benefit to the fisheries. An in-depth 
explanation of approaches to be used in this study will be presented in section 1.5. 
The Java Sea (Figure 1.1) is selected as a case study, because it is one of the most heavily 
exploited areas in Indonesia (see e.g., Martosubroto 1996); and one of the best studied 
regions in the country (see e.g., Martosubroto 1982; Pauly and Martosubroto 1996). The first 
rationale forms the basis for a sound research approach to explore ecosystem sustainability; 
while the second helps avoid being faced with 'no data' or 'not enough data', which is a 
common problem of fisheries research in developing nations. 
In this study, the Java Sea is defined as a single ecosystem, and emphasis will be given to the 
impact of the trawl ban to that ecosystem. Although mild seasonal variability within the 
6 
