Nonetheless, fish (i.e., 0.01 t-km"
2-year"
1) that depend ecologically on LBS (see section 
3.3.4.3 below, i.e., structure-associated fish or SAF) do occur in landing data for the period 
of 1974 to 1976 in the Java Sea (DGF 1976, 1977, 1978). Assuming an LBS by-catch 
produced by trawling activities in the Java Sea that is proportional to the landings of 
dependent species, the catch of LBS was set at ten times the landing of SAF. This resulting 
an LBS landing of 0.1 t*km"
2'year"
1. 
Diet composition was adopted from those for sponges, soft corals, gorgonacea (sea fans and 
sea whips), and sea anemones of the Caribbean coral reef model (Opitz 1996). Some 
modifications were made during the balancing process. 
3.3.3.5 Juvenile and adult penaeid shrimps 
Due to strong trophic changes of diet composition during their ontogeny, the penaeid 
shrimps group was divided into two, i.e., juveniles and adults pools. For this model, the 
juvenile group consisted of epibenthic post larvae and juvenile post larvae, roughly between 
2 to 4 months old. The adult group consists of both sub-adult and adult shrimps. 
These functional groups implicitly include all taxa of shrimps. However, because of both the 
limited information available for other taxa and the abundance of penaeid shrimps in the 
landings of the shrimp fishery (Chapter 2), input parameters are based on information for 
penaeid shrimps only. 
No biomass estimates were available for any shrimp taxa, thus this was left to the Ecopath 
software to calculate, with EE pre-set at 0.95. 
The P/B ratio for the adult penaeid shrimps group was obtained by an average of two 
sources. Assuming that the annual P/B ratio is equal to the annual instantaneous total 
mortality rates (Z), under equilibrium conditions and assuming the von Bertalanffy growth 
function (Allen 1971), the P/B ratio for adult penaeid shrimps was then derived as follows: 
(1). 
from catch curve analysis of (adult) penaeid shrimp in the Java Sea (Chullasorn and 
Martosubroto 1986), giving Z = 5.98 year"
1 ( M = 3.16 year"
1); 
60 
