46 Food web models and data for NW African ecosystem, L. Morissette et al.
Fitting the model to time series data
The Ecosim model behaviour is based on a ‘foraging arena’ theory (Walters and Martell, 2004), which
assumes that predator and prey behaviours cause partitioning of prey populations, which are either
available or unavailable to predators. There is continuous change between these two stages for any given
potential prey, whether it is hiding from predation in some refuge, or it is out to feed. This availability of
prey to predators is called ‘vulnerability’ in Ecosim. Mackinson et al. (2003) demonstrated the
importance of setting the vulnerabilities to fit model predictions to time-series data, as Ecosim
predictions are very sensitive to this parameter. Using default values for v has strong implications for
assumptions about species abundance relative to their carrying capacity (V. Christensen, Fisheries Centre,
UBC, personal communication). Basically, it assumes that each group can at most increase the predation
mortality they impose on their prey with a factor of 2.0 (the default v value). A lower value implies a
donor driven density-dependant interaction. On the other hand, a higher value involves a predator driven
density-independent interaction, in which predation mortality is proportional to the product of prey and
predator abundance (i.e., Lotka-Volterra). This implies a high flux rate for prey species in and out of
vulnerable biomass pools (Ainsworth 2006). Vulnerabilities were thus adjusted based on the specific
ecology of each species or trophic groups (if their behaviour, niche, or diet make them more or less
vulnerable to predators).
Using the few time series of biomass available for the trophic groups in our model, we compared Ecosim’s
projections with observed data, and adjusted v’s and other input parameters (within their range of
uncertainty) until we obtained a model configuration that allowed us to reproduce as much as possible the
trends in biomass.
Using credible models that can reproduce observed historical response to disturbances such as fishing is a
useful approach to validating our model in light of the highly uncertain data included in the model.
Fitting time series data to model predictions therefore enhances our confidence about the possible impact
of removing marine mammals in the ecosystem (Morissette 2007).
Simulating the removal of great whales in the ecosystem
A hunting pattern was chosen which generated an important increase in the mortality on the marine
mammals, in order to drive their populations close to extinction. Vasconcellos et al. (1997) showed that
for fish species, a 5-fold increase in anthropogenic predation leads to serious depletion in a group. Also,
such an extreme scenario is routinely applied to many fish populations and often associated with stock
collapse (Patterson, 1992). For marine mammals, Morissette (2007) proposed that the same kind of
increase in anthropogenic mortality is needed to simulate a crash in marine mammal biomass. Thus, we
employed a similar approach for our analysis. A 100 years simulation was performed, and the biomass
trends before and after the removal of whales were compared.
DISCUSSION
A new dataset built for Northwest Africa
All the data collected and presented in this report were used to build an Ecopath model assessing the
interactions between marine mammals and fisheries in Northwest African waters. Data presented here
represent the updated version of an initial dataset presented to local experts during a workshop held in
Dakar, Sénégal, in May 2008 (“Whale and Fish interactions: Are great whales a threat to fisheries”, see
http://www.lenfestocean.org/whales_fisheries.html).
The initial model presented in Dakar was