Modelling the trophic role of marine mammals in tropical areas, L. Morissette et al. 7
(SIAP), after two workshops in Dakar (February and August 2001), which were attended by scientists
from the six countries represented by the models: Cape Verde, Gambia, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Mauritania, and Senegal. We used the Senegambian ecosystem model (Samb and Mendy 2004) as a
starting point, and included relevant information about marine mammals and other important trophic
group for the greater Northwest Africa region.
This report describes the data sources used for constructing the Ecopath with Ecosim model of Northwest
Africa, and the uncertainty analyses performed on input and output data. The aim of this report is to
present our preliminary results to the participants of the “Whale and fish interactions: are great whales a
threat to fisheries?” workshop in Dakar, Senegal on 8-9 May, 2008. Preliminary results of the research
are still being refined and will be presented at the meeting. We hope to receive expert advice and feedback
on our research methodology, data and preliminary results during the discussions held at the workshop.
We also hope to confirm that we are not missing key data that should be included in our model. The
model will be continuously updated as more data are collected. Ultimately, our model may be used as a
basis to evaluate the trophic role of great whales in the ecosystem of Northwest Africa.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
STUDY AREA
Our study area is located off the coast of Northwest Africa, bounded by Morocco, Mauritania, Senegal,
Guinea-Bissau, the Canary Islands (Spain), Gambia, Cape Verde and Western Sahara (Figure 1). This area
defined by the United States National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) as the Canary
Current large marine ecosystem (LME), and is included in the Food and Agriculture Organization’s
(FAO’s) Eastern Central Atlantic (Major Fishing Area 34), mainly covering subdivision 34.1 (Northern
coastal), and part of subdivision 34.2 (Northern oceanic). The specific area of this model covers latitudes
from 8.5 N to 35.97 N, and longitudes from 30 W to 6.5 W, for a total area of 3,561,029 km2 (Figure 1).
Our study area includes the continental shelf as well as the deeper area.
The Northwest coast of Africa is characterized by the presence of the Canary Current, which flows along
the African coast from north to south between 30°N and 10°N and offshore to 20°W (Fedoseev 1970). As a
consequence, one major characteristic of this ecosystem is that it shows a major upwelling and other
seasonal nutrient enrichments. Climate is the primary force driving the dynamics of this ecosystem, with
intensive fishing as the secondary driving force (Bas 1993).