Modelling the trophic role of marine mammals in tropical areas, L. Morissette et al. 45
on the model results. A second uncertainty analysis was performed using Ecoranger, a resampling routine
based on input probability distributions. Finally, the robustness of our models’ structure was tested with
Ecosim by comparing predicted biomasses with time series of observed data.
Sensitivity analysis
A sensitivity routine is included in Ecopath to allow users to explore the effects of uncertainty on the
model results. The method is quite simple, and consists of plotting relative output changes against relative
changes in the inputs. The routine varies all basic input parameters (biomass [B], production to biomass
ratio [P/B], consumption to biomass ratio [Q/B], ecotrophic efficiency [EE]) in steps from -50% to +50%
for each trophic group of the model, and then checks what effect each of these steps has for each of the
input parameters on all of the “missing” basic parameters for each group in the system (Christensen et al.
2000). The output is then given as the proportion of the difference between the estimated and original
parameter to the original parameter, and converted to a percentage (Christensen et al. 2000). This
method only re-estimates the parameters for which no data was available, and that were left to be
estimated by the model, using the mass-balance constraints.
We conducted a sensitivity analysis for biomass, P/B, Q/B and EE input parameters. Our results suggest
that the sensitivity of these estimated parameters to a change in input values is relatively low (Appendix
1). A 50% change in any of the input parameters of any trophic group generated an overall response of
about 35% in the estimated parameters of other groups. Most of the changes in biomass would have a
greater effect on the EE of other trophic groups (a 50% change in biomass generates an average 20%
change in the EE of other trophic groups). In average, a 50% change in input biomass of any trophic group
generated a response of 30% in the estimated parameters of other groups.
For P/B ratio, a change in input values is more likely to affect EE parameters (with an average 50% of
change after a 50% change in P/B). Overall, a 50% change in the P/B inputs of any group would generate
a response of less than 48% in the estimated parameters of other groups.
Similarly, for Q/B input values, a 50% change of this value for any group would generate a response of less
than 25% in the estimated parameters of other trophic groups. The highest impact of a 50% change in
Q/B is seen in estimating EE (with an average response of 28% difference).
Finally, a change in EE input values generated an average 38% change in the estimated parameters. The
most important effect of such change was seen on estimated biomass parameters, with an average 40%
change after the EE is modified by ± 50%.
Overall, our sensitivity analysis suggests that potential errors in model results are approximately linearly
related to potential error in model parameters, etc. This result is consistent with those of Essington
(2007). This underscores the importance of enhancing the quality of data included in our model.
‘Ecoranger’ analysis
To account for the inherent uncertainty of input parameters, a resampling routine called Ecoranger is
included in the EwE software and accepts input probability distributions for the biomasses, consumption
and production rates, ecotrophic efficiencies, catch rates, and diet compositions. Ecoranger then draws
random input variables using the range of possible values for each parameter, and the resulting model is
then evaluated (based on least sum of squared residuals and physiological and mass-balance constraints)
(Christensen et al. 2005).
Starting with the initial model and these setups, 10,000 models were run by Ecoranger, until 200 model
runs passed the selection criteria, and the best fitting model for the coast of Northwest Africa was used for
further analysis.