Modelling the trophic role of marine mammals in tropical areas, L. Morissette et al. 41
analysis fall into our ‘coastal demersals’ trophic group: white grouper (Epinephelus aenus), red Pandora
(Pagellus bellottii), bluespotted seabream (Pagrus caeruleostictus), West African goatfish (Pseudupeneus
prayensis), and lesser African threadfin (Galeoides decadactylus). We summarized these data into an
aggregated time series representing coastal demersals (Table 19).
Gascuel et al. (2007) estimated the biomass of 24 different demersal taxa, selected for their importance in
the survey catches and/or the fishery in Mauritania. This was presented as year-to-year fluctuations from
1982 to 2006. Different Ecopath trophic groups were covered by this study: bathydemersal predators
(Merluccius sp.), sharks (Mustelus mustelus), Rays (Raja miraletus, R. straeleni), and cephalopods
(Octopus vulgaris, Sepia officinalis). The resulting time series, in density (t*km-2), is presented in table
19.
A report of the FAO (2002) presents the outcomes of the Working Group on the Assessment of Small
Pelagic Fish off Northwest Africa, after their workshop in Banjul, Republic of the Gambia, 5-12 April
2002. In that document, indices of biomass were calculated for Sardinella aurita and S. maderensis from
acoustic surveys of the R/V by Dr. Fridtjof Nansen. The surveyed area covered the coastal shelf and
immediately adjacent waters and ranges from Safi, in Morocco, to Ghana (from about 32°N to 5°N) a
distance of some 2,500 nmi. This is similar to what our study area covers. After converting the biomass of
these acoustic surveys into densities (t*km-2), we ended up with time series for our “clupeid” group for the
Ecopath model (Table 19).
Another report by the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT 1999c)
estimated the biomass trends for skipjack tuna (Katsuwonus pelamis), which is one of the key species of
our “large pelagics” group for the model. As an alternative to the traditional production models used by
the Standing Committee on Research and Statistics (SCRS), a new model was presented by Dr. Maury
during an inter-sessional stock assessment session of Atlantic skipjack in Funchal, Madeira, 28 June to 2
July 1999. This original non-equilibrium production model was developed for skipjack stocks, and
although various runs of this experimental production model were made, only the results from a total
Atlantic stock model were presented and discussed. It was considered that the results obtained from this
model are probably dominated by the eastern Atlantic fisheries, which are consistent with our study area
of Northwest Africa. The resulting time series of biomass densities for the large pelagics are presented in
table 19.
Additionally, a report by Chassot et al. (2006) presented a global dynamic model developed in a Bayesian
context to evaluate the stock of common octopus (Octopus vulgaris) in Mauritania from 1971 to 2005.
Biomasses estimated by the model include uncertainty linked to natural variability, and error in
observation to give a realistic representation of the dynamics of common octopus stocks in the area.
According to these data, the biomass declined by more than 80% between 1971 and 2005. Since the study
by Gascuel et al. (2007) presented more cephalopods species, and because the trend of declining biomass
is similar in both studies (see Figure 5), we decided not to use the time series of Chassot et al. (2006) a
priori. However, these data were considered as alternative values for model validation.