Modelling the trophic role of marine mammals in tropical areas, L. Morissette et al. 13
MODEL DESCRIPTION
The ecosystem model for Northwest Africa was modified based on a model for the Senegambian
ecosystem in the 1990s (Samb and Mendy 2004). The Senegambian ecosystem model was used because it
was representative of a typical ecosystem in Northwest Africa, and could thus be extrapolated to represent
our larger study area. This was not the case, for example, for the Mauritanian EEZ model (Sidi and
Guénette 2004), which represents an upwelling ecosystem, with more particular characteristics (D.
Gascuel pers. comm.). Originally including 18 trophic groups, the model was modified to include a better
representation of the different marine mammals species, and also commercially important fish groups for
the Northwest African region. In order to construct comparable models for other focal areas where we are
studying the interaction between marine mammals and fisheries (e.g. Caribbean and South Pacific),
biomass was aggregated into distinct functional feeding groups. These groups were defined based on the
similarities in food habits, habitats, and biological variables (Essington 2006). The model for Northwest
Africa presented here consists of 27 trophic groups: 10 marine mammal groups, one seabirds group, 9 fish
groups, cephalopods, large crustaceans, 2 benthos groups, zooplankton, phytoplankton, and detritus
(Table 3).
For most trophic groups, we used adult diet data, as most of the biomass estimates available were only for
the spawning stock or adult biomass.
Cetacean groups were included in this ecosystem model at a high taxonomic resolution because of the aim
of our study. It is important to note though, that feeding patterns of the baleen whales in particular are
such, that very little of their annual food consumption (if any) is taken in Northwest African waters. The
tropical, warmer waters covered by our three study areas represent, in fact, breeding areas for baleen
whales, in which these species are known to mainly fast (Brodie 1975; Sergeant 1977; Brown and Lockyer
1984; Corkeron and Connor 1999; Perry et al. 1999, Clapham 2002; Jann et al. 2003). Indeed, blue, fin,
sei and humpback whales spend their feeding season in the colder waters of north Atlantic in the Atlantic
part of Northern Hemisphere or in the Antarctic waters in the Southern Hemisphere. Lockyer (1981)
showed that most baleen whales feed considerably less in their breeding grounds than they would in
feeding areas. She proposed that the average amounts consumed off breeding areas probably amount to
about 10% or less of that in the feeding ground. This reduced consumption rate of 10% was then applied
to many other ecosystems by different authors (Brown and Lockyer 1984; Mohammed 2003).
In our model, we treated these migratory species as part of the ‘system’ all the time in terms of some
calculated impacts like fishing, whaling, and general trophic interactions. To account for the fact that
most feeding activity occurs outside the system, we set a high diet proportion as ‘Import’ in the Ecopath
diet consumption matrix (Christensen et al. 2005).