
=== PDF PAGE 1 ===
ESSAS Report Series Number 3
Report of the 2008 ESSAS Annual Science 
Meeting
With Sessions/Workshops on
Results from the 2007 Hokodate Workshops and Planning: 
Hotspots, Thresholds and Ice Models
The Importance of Advective Processes in Sub-Arctic Seas
Climate Forcing of Marine Ecosystems
And
Modeling Ecosystem Response
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
15-19 September 2008
 
Margaret M. McBride, Compiler
November 2008

=== PDF PAGE 2 ===
2
Table of Contents
Page
1. Background 3
2. Session Reports 4
2.1. Session 1: Results from the 2007 Hakodate Workshops and Planning:
 Hotspots, Thresholds and Ice Models 
2.2. Session 2: The Importance of Advective Processes in Sub-Arctic Seas 
2.3. Session 3: Climate Forcing of Marine Ecosystems 
2.4. Session 4: Modeling Ecosystem Response.
3. References 11
4: Acknowledgments 11
Appendix 1: List of Participants 13
Appendix 2: Agenda / Schedule of Activities 14
Appendix 3: Extended Abstracts 18
Session 1 — Results from the 2007 Hakodate Workshops and Planning:
 Hotspots, Thresholds and Ice Models
Session 2 — Workshop on the Importance of Advective Processes in 
 Sub-Arctic Seas
Session 3 — Workshop on Climate Forcing of Marine Ecosystems 
Session 4 — Workshop on Modeling Ecosystem Response
Appendix 4: Terms of Reference ESSAS WG-1 52
Appendix 5: Terms of Reference ESSAS WG-2 54
Appendix 6: Terms of Reference ESSAS WG-3 56
Appendix 7: Terms of Reference ESSAS WG-4 58
Appendix 8: ICED – Integrating Climate and Ecosystem Dynamics 62
Program Overview

=== PDF PAGE 3 ===
3
1. Background
The 2008 ESSAS Annual Science Meeting (ASM) was held in Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada from 15 to 17 September, and hosted by the Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
(B.I.O.). An annual meeting of the ESSAS Science Steering Committee (SSC) followed 
on September 18th and 19th. The annual science meeting was opened with welcoming 
remarks from Erica Head (Department of Fisheries and Oceans, B.I.O.) and ESSAS Co￾chair (Professor George Hunt, University of Washington). A round of self-introductions 
by participants followed. Fifty-six participants attended from seven countries: Canada -
29; Denmark - 1; Iceland - 1; Japan – 4; Korea - 1; Norway – 5; Russia - 1; UK – 1; USA
- 9) (Appendix 1). 
Consistent with the goal of the ESSAS program — to compare, quantify and predict the 
impact of climate variability on the productivity and sustainability of Sub-Arctic marine 
ecosystems — the meeting agenda (Appendix 2) was divided into different sessions to 
present ongoing research efforts of ESSAS working groups (Appendices 3-6). Session 
1 was convened by Professor Hunt to review results from workshops during the 2007 
ESSAS Annual Science Meeting in Hakodate, Japan “Hotspots, Thresholds, and Ice 
Models”. This included results from: long-term simulations of ice and ocean climate in 
the Bering Sea; examinations of thresholds in warming Sub-Arctic Seas; and
delineations of hotspots of biodiversity and aggregation in Sub-Arctic Seas. Session 2 
was a workshop convened by Ken Drinkwater to examine the importance of advective 
processes in Sub-Arctic Seas. Session 3 was a workshop convened by James 
Overland to examine climate forcing of marine ecosystems, and was a follow-up to one 
held in 2007 in Hakodate; it was designed to consider types of ecological responses to 
future climate change, to review IPCC models and their relevance to Sub-Arctic Seas, 
and to discuss down-scaling the results of these models to regional models. Session 4 
was a workshop on modeling ecosystem response using ECOPATH. (Appendix 1, 
Schedule of Activities). 
During the 2007 annual meeting in Hakodate, Japan, WG-3 decided to build the agenda 
for its workshop at the 2008 annual meeting around its work using a single model 
(ECOPATH) to compare a number of Sub-Arctic ecosystems. The rationale is that
differences that emerge using a single model will more likely reflect differences in the 
systems being modeled than differences in the architecture of the model used. 
Consequently, the 2008 annual meeting workshop for WG-3 presents ECOPATH 
modeling results from: the Sea of Okhotsk, Oyashio Current, eastern Bering Sea, 
Labrador Shelf, West Greenland Sea, Icelandic Sea, and the Norwegian/Barents Sea. 
As well as comparisons of ECPATH modeling results from the Marine Ecosystems of 
Norway and the United States (MENU) project, and comparisons of downscaled climate 
change response for Sub-Arctic Seas. 
The near-term objective is to apply a number of models to one or more system to 
examine differences in their ability to capture effects of climate forcing. The overarching
goal for ESSAS is to develop predictive models of the response in Sub-Arctic marine 
ecosystems (WG-3) to the climate scenarios developed by the Regional Climate 
Prediction Working Group (WG-1), given the mechanisms believed to link ecosystem 
components (WG-2).

=== PDF PAGE 4 ===
4
2. Session Reports
2.1. Session 1 
Results from the 2007 Hakodate Workshops and Planning: Hotspots, 
Thresholds and Ice Models
Convener: George Hunt
University of Washington School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, USA
WG-2 on Bio-physical coupling held a half-day Workshop in Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada in September 2008. The Workshop was intended to reprise progress on the 
“Thresholds” paper headed up by Dr. John Bengtson and the “Hotspots” paper headed 
up now by Dr. George Hunt as agreed to in Hakodate, in June 2007. We also had an 
invited presentation by Dr. Boris Worm of Dalhousie University on his work on 
biodiversity hotspots in lower latitude oceans. A rough draft of the hotspots paper is well 
underway. Also, as a follow-up to the Halifax meeting, Dr. Enrique Curchitser presented 
a talk on progress in the modeling of sea-ice cover in the Sub-Arctic Seas.
2.2. Session 2 
The Importance of Advective Processes in Sub-Arctic Seas 
Convener: Ken Drinkwater
Institute of Marine Research, Norway
At the 2007 ESSAS Meeting in Hakodate in Japan, plans were made for a workshop on 
the role of advection in Sub-Arctic Seas at the 2008 meeting. Its purpose was to review 
the various ways that transport processes affect marine ecosystems through 
presentations on the topic covering several different Sub-Arctic regions. These would 
also allow a comparison of advective processes between regions. In addition, and in 
line with continuing efforts to carry out comparisons between the Sub-Arctic and 
Antarctic regions, Dr. Sally Thorpe of BAS in Cambridge in the UK was invited to make 
a presentation on the role of advection in Antarctic waters. The workshop was held at 
the Bedford Institute of Oceanography in order to allow more Department of Fisheries 
and Oceans scientists to participate in the workshop with the hope that some of them 
will become involved in ESSAS activities in the future. 
The meeting was opened with a few words of welcome by Dr. Mike Sinclair, director of 
the Bedford Institute followed by the convener, Dr. Ken Drinkwater of Norway, who 
outlined briefly the objectives of the workshop. Before addressing advection per se, the 
first presentation was that of Dr. Ken Frank (Canada) of the Bedford Institute, who 
discussed comparative studies giving results from recent work he and his colleagues 
have carried out primarily in the Northwest Atlantic. Such comparative studies focusing 
on finding large-scale patterns and then developing explanations or mechanisms have 

=== PDF PAGE 5 ===
5
been labeled as macroecology. He presented results from several studies in the Pacific
and Atlantic showing relationships between phytoplankton productivity and fish 
production suggesting bottom-up forcing. He also noted the problem of top down 
forcing citing the large declines in several size classes of fish on the Scotian Shelf off 
Nova Scotia. Finally he discussed results from a comparative study of the correlations 
between trophic levels for 47 regions in the Northern Hemisphere. The results show a 
positive latitudinal gradient with negative correlations (indicating top-down control) in the 
more northern regions and positive correlations (indicating more bottom-up control) in 
the south. Causes of this pattern were attributed to both decreasing temperatures and 
reductions in the number of species (biodiversity) northwards. 
Dr. Thorpe (UK) discussed the role of advection on Antarctic krill, the dominant food 
source in the Southern Ocean. She began by discussing the physical oceanography 
whose main features are the clockwise Circumpolar Current, an anticlockwise coastal 
current, and eddy features largely associated with the geography and topography of the 
region. Seventy percent of the krill population around Antarctica is found in the 
southwest Atlantic sector and advection and retention of krill into this area play an 
important role in this distribution, shown from results in the vicinity of the island of South 
Georgia. Modeling efforts undertaken were then presented including physical models of 
advection and sea ice and biophysical models examining the advection and growth of 
krill. They have also included krill behavior in the models through random swimming. 
She finished with a brief description of the new ICED (Integrating Climate and 
Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean) program within IMBER that is a follow on 
from the GLOBEC Southern Ocean program.
Dr. Andrew Pershing (USA) examined the advection of Calanus finmarchicus in the 
North Atlantic with special emphasis on different scales, spatially from patches to entire 
shelves and temporally from seasonal to inter-decadal. High concentrations of C. 
finmarchicus or patches are needed for whales to feed successfully with examples 
given from the Gulf of Maine off the northeast US. Internal waves and Langmuir 
circulation are possible physical mechanisms contributing to these patches. Within the 
Gulf of Maine, advection of zooplankton by the currents was shown to be important at 
spatial scales of kilometers and weeks but at the larger Gulf scale production seemed to 
dominate over advection. Strong correlations in zooplankton on the scale of the NW 
Atlantic shelves were found indicating common responses. There is also some 
evidence for propagation (advection?) of zooplankton within the Gulf of Maine and into 
the Middle Atlantic Bight. Examination of initial boundary conditions, sea surface 
temperatures and surface chlorophyll levels on inter-annual variability of C. finmarchicus
within the Gulf indicated that the first two factors had the strongest influence. 
Dr. Orio Yamamura (Japan) discussed the role of tidal currents in supplying prey to the 
offshore Oyashio Shelf Region off northern Japan. Walleye pollock spawn in the 
inshore regions (Funaka Bay) of Hokkaido and then feed in the offshore regions off the 
east coast of Hokkaido. Biophysical models indicated that the zooplankton populations 
in these offshore regions would be depleted by the feeding of the pollock and the 
pollock would subsequently crash without a continual supply of zooplankton. This led to 
investigations into possible advective mechanisms that could supply the zooplankton. 
Field surveys coupled with modeling pointed out that tidal exchange due to cross shelf 
currents and tidal mixing were sufficient to transport zooplankton from off the shelf into 

=== PDF PAGE 6 ===
6
the feeding areas of the pollock. Dr. Yamamura’s talk was not presented at BIO but 
rather on Wednesday at the Lord Nelson due to his flight being delayed by a day 
because of poor weather.
Dr. George Hunt (USA) presented examples of the role of advection on the Bering Sea. 
Of particular importance are the inflows to the Bering Sea through the Aleutian Passes. 
In those such as Amukta Pass that are not too deep or too shallow the strong current 
shears mix nutrients vertically. This results in high nutrient concentrations near the sea 
surface that are advected into the Bering Sea where they promote increased primary 
production. High zooplankton concentrations near the passes also attract huge 
concentrations of feeding seabirds as well as whales. Advection northward through the 
Bering Sea is important as a source of both nutrients and freshwater to the Arctic. 
Tides generate residual currents such as around the Pribolof Islands that can lead to 
longer than usual residence times for the local biota. Inter-annual changes in wind 
induced circulation patterns were shown to account for difference in larval drift, which in 
turn lead to significant differences in recruitment levels of flatfish species.
The final three papers dealt with egg and larval drift. Dr. Kai Wieland (Denmark) 
discussed the effects of the drift of cod eggs and larvae between Iceland and Greenland 
in a presentation delivered by K. Drinkwater. Surveys have shown that eggs spawned 
off SW and western Iceland drift towards East Greenland. Those that take a more 
westerly route towards Greenland as opposite to a more northern path are more likely to 
survive. While eggs and larvae have been shown in past studies to drift northwards 
along West Greenland, in recent years few eggs or larvae have been observed past 
62°N. Modeling advection of shrimp larvae suggested northward drift by the residual 
currents but this would require s southward back-migration of the adults, which has not 
been observed. Dr. David Brickman (Canada) presented studies of the drift of cod eggs 
and larvae around Iceland. Based on genetics and otolith shape, the cod from the 
south side of the island are different than those in the north. Cod spawned in the south, 
however, drift to the north side where they reside as juveniles. A bio-physical model of 
the drift of cod eggs and larvae was described that is able to recreate the observed drift 
and distribution patterns. Dr. Trond Kristiansen (Norway) emphasized the importance of 
vertical structure in modeling the drift of cod eggs and larvae based on studies off 
Norway. Cod mainly spawn in the Lofoten area off Western Norway and drift northward 
into the Barents Sea. The individual based model used examined the effects of 
temperature, prey concentrations and light levels on the drift and growth of the cod 
larvae. The vertical location of the larvae is a balance between high food 
concentrations but high predation near surface and lower food but less predation 
deeper in the water column. Larval behavior will have to be incorporated in drift studies 
in order to adequately represent reality. 
It was clear from the presentations that advection strongly influences the biota in all of 
the regions discussed. Special attention was paid to the transport of fish eggs and 
larvae by the residual circulation and for inter-annual variability due to changes in the 
winds. Advection also was shown to affect nutrient levels, heat and freshwater content, 
and zooplankton concentrations. The relative importance of advection on zooplankton 
depends upon both the spatial and temporal scales one is looking at. Further 
comparison of advection and advective processes and their effects should be carried 

=== PDF PAGE 7 ===
7
out between different Sub-Arctic regions and between the Sub-Arctic and Antarctic 
regions.
2.3. Session 3 
Climate Forcing of Marine Ecosystems
Convener: James Overland 
NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, USA
The morning session was devoted to the application of future climate projections from 
International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC AR4) models to ESSAS regions. Ken 
Drinkwater set the context with a talk on ecosystem responses to climate forcing in 
North Atlantic Sub-Arctic Seas. He showed examples where the type of ecosystem 
response to increased temperature is location-dependent. Different seas are nearer or 
further in time from potential threshold limits of major bio-geographic or food web 
changes for specific species.
During the balance of the morning, James Overland and Vladimir Kattsov gave 
presentations related to the Report from Working Group I on climate model selection. 
Based on multiple analyses, WG1 has concluded that the IPCC 4th Report models have 
utility for climate projections out to 2050 for ESSAS seas. The projections, however, 
vary based on model, location, variable, and evaluation metric. WG1 concluded that 
there is no one best model. An approach is to determine whether certain models 
represent outliers when compared to observational data from the 20th century, and then 
to excluded them from further analysis. It is important to develop observational 
constraints based on how model hind-casts compare with late twentieth century data in 
terms of matching means, inter-annual variance, and annual cycles of temperature and 
pressure. A meta-analysis (comparison of independent studies) was conducted to 
recommend a subset of models for regional climate projections. Rather than relying on 
a single model, at least 3-5 models should be considered in any climate projection to 
account for model-to-model uncertainty. This is the major source of uncertainty in 
projections out to 2050. Out to 2100, the choice of which economic/social scenario for 
different greenhouse emissions is the major source of uncertainty.
Loss of sea ice — 38% of summer-sea ice in the central Arctic during 2007 and 2008 —
is occurring faster than expected from IPCC projections. This results from the influence 
of natural variability, in addition to emerging climate forcing from anthropogenic 
activities, and ice/ocean feedbacks. ESSAS seas, however, which respond to winter 
and spring ice growth, are mostly decoupled from this summer loss of Arctic multi-year 
sea ice. In upcoming decades, ESSAS seas will still be dominated by multi-annual to 
decadal natural variability in sea ice, temperature, winds and related variables.

=== PDF PAGE 8 ===
8
The afternoon was devoted to the related issue of downscaling, i.e. how to infer local 
scale 0(10 km) climate impacts based on the large scale 0(200 km) projections from 
IPCC models. Two approaches noted by John Walsh are: 1) a statistical fit of 
observational data to IPCC and NCAR reanalysis fields of variables; and 2) the use of 
high resolution numerical ocean models driven by boundary conditions from IPCC 
projections (dynamical downscaling). Foreman presented an application of statistical 
downscaling for coastal winds. Enrique Curchitser, Simon Prisensberg, and Paul 
Budgell discussed regional ocean models, and approaches to dynamical downscaling. 
A final discussion by Mike Foreman concluded that for ESSAS purposes the dynamical 
downscaling approach is necessary to capture local oceanographic features such as 
fronts, current jets, and eddies.
2.4. Session 4
Modeling Ecosystem Response
Conveners: 
Bernard Megrey1
, Shin-ichi Ito2
, and Kenneth Rose3
1
NOAA Alaska Fisheries Science Center, USA
2
Tohoku, National Fisheries Research Institute, Japan
3
Louisiana State University, USA
Rationale
The charge of WG3 is to model marine ecosystem response. Understanding must be 
achieved, however, before modeling can begin. A necessary first step toward 
understanding any marine ecosystem (and its response) is to determine its community 
structure and function and its variability. Obtaining such understanding has proved 
difficult because of the complexity of marine ecosystems and its many interacting 
components
Testing hypotheses by conducting in situ manipulative experiments at the scale of 
ocean basins is impractical and conclusive cause-and-effect evidence of underlying 
mechanisms is not possible. The comparative approach is useful in such situations. 
Comparisons can identify the main internal and external variables of the system, 
potential gaps in knowledge in one system compared to others, comparable key species 
or species assemblages, and comparable trophic levels and food-web structures.
Comparisons allow the opportunity to take a broad perspective which provides the 
ability to draw generalizations, determine what is fundamental to ecosystems in general 
and what is unique to particular ecosystems, and provide new insights into mechanisms 
through which ecosystems respond to physical forcing

=== PDF PAGE 9 ===
9
Objective
The objective of the workshop was to take a very basic first level approach. We began 
WG3 activity by comparing Sub-Arctic marine ecosystems by applying one common 
modeling approach to multiple ecosystems using the Ecopath modeling paradigm 
(EwE). 
An ecosystem/Ecopath presentation rubric was supplied to presenters to help facilitate 
comparisons among the various ESSAS ecosystems. This included items such as the 
physical background and setting, geography (latitude and longitude boundaries, surface 
area, and average depth), climate (major seasonal, multiyear and decadal influences), 
hydrography and bathymetry (major currents and circulation patterns and significant 
aspects of bathymetry), the role of ice? (is ice important? what role does it play?), 
biological background and setting, nutrients (major nutrients, limiting nutrients, range or 
annual average levels), primary producers (community composition/dominate taxa, 
annual production cycle, maximum/average production rates, total primary production 
etc), zooplankton (community composition/dominate taxa, maximum/average production 
rates etc), benthos (community composition/dominate taxa, biomass estimates or 
trends), fish (community composition/dominate taxa, biomass estimates or trends, catch 
trends of top 5 species, total catch over past 5 years), seabirds (community 
composition/dominate taxa, biomass estimates or trends), marine mammals (community 
composition/dominate taxa, biomass estimates or trends, catch trends of top 5 species), 
trophic interactions (major energy/mass pathways, trophic bottlenecks, etc), a trophic 
food web connection diagram from Ecopath software, fisheries and management 
systems, major natural and anthropogenic drivers, critical factors that cause ecosystem 
change, and preparation of a trophic linkage diagram. Presenters were also requested 
to deliver a version of their Ecopath model so that it could be archived within the ESSAS 
website.
Presentations
Regrets: Several participants that were scheduled to appear had to offer their regrets. 
These included co-chairs Shin-ichi Ito and Kenneth Rose as well as Vladimir 
Radchenko, Kerim Aydin, and Astrid Jarre. WG3 did have the benefit of unanticipated 
presentations from Orio Yamamura and Yasunori Sakurai. The workshop agenda is 
presented in End Note I.
Since WG3 was at the end of three days of workshops, the agenda was dynamic as we 
tried to accommodate unanticipated presentations as well as carryovers from the 
previous two days. The following description does not follow the organized agenda in 
Endnote I because of the reason mentioned earlier. 
Presentations started with Orio Yamamura’s report on “Advective supply of offshore 
prey into the continental shelves in the Oyashio area: the role of tidal currents”. This 
was followed by an analysis by Michio J, Kishi on the application of different lower tropic 
levels marine ecosystem models, results from a side-by-side comparison of various 
ecosystem configurations and conclusions about the benefits of comparative analysis. 
After these, Bernard A. Megrey gave a presentation on lessons learned from the 
ESSAS-sponsored Marine Ecosystems of Norway and the US (MENU) project.

=== PDF PAGE 10 ===
10
These were followed by individual Ecopath presentation on various ESSAS ecosystems 
including the Norwegian/Barents Sea (Skaret), eastern Newfoundland Shelf (Bundy), 
eastern Bering Sea (Aydin – delivered by Bernard A. Megrey), Icelandic Sea 
(Astthorsson), western Greenland Sea (Jarre – delivered by Kai Weiland), and the 
Oyashio-Kuroshio current region (Hakamada). These were followed by a presentation 
by Budgell on a comparison of ice dynamics using two versions of the ROMS model for 
the Barents and eastern Bering Sea and an unanticipated presentation by Yasunori 
Sakurai on the effects of sea ice on the fate of walleye pollock. For the most part, all 
presenters on ESSAS ecosystems using EwE conformed to the suggested presentation 
rubric to varying levels depending on the information they had at hand. 
The workshop ended with a discussion session focused on the following questions 
designed to stimulate discussion.
Q1: What is similar? 
Q2: What is different? 
Q3: Which systems should be considered for comparison? 
Q4: Should other approaches, other than Ecopath or the meeting template, be 
considered?
Q5: Is it possible to compare ecosystem models without considering decisions made by 
the modeler? How does that impact interpretation or ability to compare?
Q6: Are results from EwE, as a first step, sufficient to effectively compare ESSAS 
ecosystems – considering Q5 and consequences for the number of species and 
metrics derived from them?
Q7: How do we foster multidisciplinary and international collaborations required to carry 
out comparisons?
The consensus from the audience was that the session was received well and moved 
forward the goals of ESSAS as they concerned ecosystem comparisons.
Outcomes and Action Plan
Plans were discussed to take the workshop results and prepare a manuscript to submit 
for publication in a peer-reviewed publication. A follow-up meeting was scheduled for 
the following morning. At this meeting, it was decided to prepare a data catalogue to 
determine if sufficient information was available to prepare a paper on comparisons of 
ESSAS ecosystems for submission to a peer-reviewed publication outlet. Megrey will 
prepare a template of available information products useful for comparisons and 
distribute it to representatives from individual ecosystems. From the catalogue, an 
evaluation will be made as to the likelihood of a suitable publication arising from the 
information gathered. Plans are in place for Megrey and Hunt to meet with Radchenko 

=== PDF PAGE 11 ===
11
at the October PICES in Dalian China to gauge the Russian interest to include the Sea 
of Okhotsk ecosystem in the comparison.
Finally, WG3 prepared a proposal to GLOBEC to fund an inter-sessional workshop to 
coordinate the preparation of an end-to-end marine ecosystem model (see End Note II).
3. References
Hunt, G. L., Jr. and K. Drinkwater (Compilers) 2007. Report of the ESSAS Workshop:
Development of Methods for Comparisons of the Sub-Arctic Seas, St. 
Petersburg, Russia, 12-14 June 2006. ESSAS Report Series 1, 47pp.
4. Acknowledgments
We thank the attendees at the ESSAS Halifax Workshops for their active participation in 
discussions and for their comments on earlier drafts of this report. Special thanks go to 
the Bedford Institute of Oceanography (B.I.O.) for hosting this meeting — including an 
informative visit to the Institute followed by a delightful reception for participants — and 
to Dr. Erica Head (Department of Fisheries and Oceans, B.I.O.) for her support and 
efforts in arranging the venue and meeting logistics. We thank the North Pacific 
Research Board, PICES, and the GLOBEC International Project Office for their financial 
support of the workshop. The Research Council of Norway and NESSAS supported 
several of the Norwegian participants, and the U.S. National Science Foundation, Office 
of Polar Programs supported participation by scientists from the Bering Ecosystem 
Study (BEST) program.

=== PDF PAGE 12 ===
12
Appendix 1: List of Participants
PERSON COUNTRY e-mail
Julio N. Araujo Canada julioaneves@hotmail.com
Olafur Astthorsson Iceland osa@hafro.is
Kumiko Azetsu-Scott Canada azetsu-scottk@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
John Bengtsson USA John.Bengtson@noaa.gov
Daniel Boyce Canada dboyce@dal.ca
Dave Brickman Canada brickmand@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Paul Budgell Norway paul.budgell@imr.no
Alida Bundy Canada alida.bundy@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Mather Carscallen Canada mather.carscallen@nrc.ca
Bob Conover Canada rconover@eagle.ca
Adam Cook Canada cooka@mar.dfo.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Enrique Curchister USA enrique@marine.rutgers.edu
Earl Dawe Canada earl.dawe@dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Ken Drinkwater Norway ken.drinkwater@imr.no
Jon Fisher Canada fisherjad@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Mike Foreman Canada mike.foreman@dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Ken Frank Canada FrankK@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Wendy Gentleman Canada wendy.gentleman@dal.ca
Takashi Hakamada Japan hakamada@cetacean.jp
Charles Hannah Canada hannahc@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Gareth Harding Canada hardingg@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Glen Harrison Canada harrisong@mr.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Daisuke Hasegawa Canada daisuke@dal.ca
Erica Head Canada erica.heat@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
George Hunt USA geohunt2@u.washington.edu
Diego Ibarra Canada dibarra@dal.ca
Vladimir Kattsov Russia kattsov@mail.ru
Micho Kishi Japan mjkishi@nifty.com
Trond Kristiansen Norway trond.kristiansen@imr.no
William Li Canada lib@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
John Loder Canada john.loder@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Marta Loll Canada martaloll@dal.ca
Seelye Martin USA seelye.martin@nasa.gov
Margaret McBride Norway margaret.mcbride@imr.no
Bern Megrey USA bern.megrey@noaa.gov
Robert Miller Canada millerr@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Franz Mueter USA franz.mueter@uaf.edu
Anna Neuheimer Canada anna.neuheimer@phys.ocean.dal.ca
Jim Overland USA james.e.overland@noaa.gov
Andrew Pershing USA andrew.pershing@maine.edu
Simon Prinsenberg Canada simon.prinsenberg@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Yasunori Sakurai Japan sakurai@fish.hokudai.ac.jp
Ray Sambrotto USA sambrott@ldeo.columbia.edu
Allison Schmidt Canada aschmidt@dal.ca
Hyoung-Chul Shin Korea hcshin@kopri.re.kr

=== PDF PAGE 13 ===
13
PERSON COUNTRY E-mail
Mike Sinclair Canada sinclairm@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca
Georg Skaret Norway georg.skaret@imr.no
Sally Thorpe UK seth@bas.ac.uk
Kai Wieland Denmark kw@aqua.dtu.dk
Boris Worm Canada bworm@dal.ca
Orio Yamamura Japan orioy@affrc.go.jp
Tyler Zemlak Canada tzemlak@dal.ca

=== PDF PAGE 14 ===
14
Appendix 2: Agenda / Schedule of Activities
2008 ESSAS Annual Science and SSC Meetings
15 - 19 September 2008
Lord Nelson Hotel, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada
Monday 15 September
Admiral Room
09:00 Welcome from Erica Head (Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Canada, 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography) Local Host
09:10 Welcome from George Hunt (University of Washington, USA)
09:15: SESSION 1: Results from the 2007 Hakodate Workshops and Planning: 
Hotspots, Thresholds and Ice Models (Convener - George Hunt)
09:15: Enrique Curchitser (Rutgers University, USA) - A 50-year simulation of ice and 
ocean climate in the Bering Sea
09:45: John Bengtson (NOAA National Marine Mammal Laboratory, USA) -
Thresholds in warming Sub-Arctic Seas
10:15: George Hunt - Hotspots of biodiversity and aggregation in the Sub-Arctic Seas
10:45: Break
11:15: Invited Speaker – Boris Worm (Dalhousie University, Canada) – Marine 
biodiversity hotspots: What have we learned so far? 
11:45: Discussion
12:00: Lunch Break
13:00: Bus from the Lord Nelson Hotel to the Bedford Institute of Oceanography (B.I.O.)
B.I.O. Main Auditorium
13:45: Welcome to the B.I.O.
14:00: SESSION 2: Workshop on the Importance of Advective Processes in Sub￾Arctic Seas (Convener - Ken Drinkwater, Institute of Marine 
Research, Bergen, Norway)
14:00: Ken Drinkwater - Introduction 
14:05: Invited Speaker - Ken Frank (Department of Fisheries and Oceans, B.I.O., 
Canada) - Comparative ecology of marine ecosystems

=== PDF PAGE 15 ===
15
14:35: Invited Speaker - Sally Thorpe (British Antarctic Survey, UK) - Modeling the life 
cycle of Antarctic krill: the importance of advection
15:05 Break
15:25 Invited Speaker - Andrew Pershing (University of Maine, USA) - Influence of 
advection on Calanus finmarchicus abundance across multiple scales
15:45: Invited Speaker - Orio Yamamura (Hokkaido National Fisheries Research
Institute, Japan) - Advective supply of offshore prey into the continental shelves 
in the Oyashio area: the role of tidal currents
16:00: Invited Speaker - George Hunt, Phyllis Stabeno (Pacific Marine Environmental 
Laboratory, USA) and Rebecca Woodgate (Applied Physics Laboratory, 
University of Washington) – Advective processes in the Bering Sea 
16:15: Invited Speaker - Kai Wieland (Technical University of Denmark/Danish Institute 
for Fisheries Research, Denmark) (given by Ken Drinkwater) – Effects of 
advection on the West Greenland Shelf
16:30: Invited Speaker - Dave Brickman (B.I.O., Canada) - Larval drift of the Icelandic 
cod
16:45: Invited Speaker - Trond Kristiansen (Institute of Marine Research, Norway) -
Larval drift into the Barents Sea of NE Arctic Cod
17:00: Ken Drinkwater - Concluding Remarks
Following the Workshop there will be a RECEPTION at B.I.O. in the “Iceberg” area
Tuesday 16 September
Admiral Room
SESSION 3: Workshop on Climate Forcing of Marine Ecosystems. Convener: 
James Overland (NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, USA)
09:00: Introduction to Workshop – Jim Overland 
09:30: Invited Speaker - Ken Drinkwater - Ecosystem responses to climate forcing in the 
Barents and other North Atlantic Sub-Arctic Seas
10:00: Break
10:30: Invited Speaker - Vladimir Kattsov (Voeikov Main Geophysical Observatory,
Russia) - Climate prediction: IPCC 4th Assessment Report and beyond
11:10: James Overland, John Walsh (University of Alaska, USA) and Vladimir Kattsov -
Results of the ESSAS Panel on climate model selection
11:40 Open Discussion
12:00-13:30 Lunch 

=== PDF PAGE 16 ===
16
13:30: Invited Speaker - John. Walsh (given by James Overland) – Review of statistical 
downscaling to regional and local scales
14:00: Invited Speaker - Mike Foreman (Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Canada) 
- Statistical and dynamical downscaling: examples and strategies for the 
Northeast Pacific
14:30: Break
15:00: Invited Speaker - Enrique Curchitser - Downscaling climate simulations using a 
fully-coupled global/regional model
15:30: Invited Speaker - Simon Prinsenberg (Department of Fisheries and Oceans, 
B.I.O., Canada) - Physical oceanographic modeling the Canadian east coast 
shelves
16:00: Invited Speaker - Paul Budgell (Institute of Marine Research, Norway) -
Validation of climate downscaling scenarios for the Nordic and Barents Seas
16:30: Invited Speaker - Mike Foreman - Summary and discussion: Strengths and 
weaknesses in recent regional ocean modeling
17:00: Adjourn
19:00: Group Dinner at the Tap Room (lobster, mussels and other local delicacies)
Wednesday 17 September
Admiral Room
SESSION 4: Workshop on Modeling Ecosystem Response (Conveners: Bernard 
Megrey, NOAA Alaska Fisheries Science Center, USA; Shin-ichi Ito, Tohoku,
National Fisheries Research Institute, Japan; and Kenneth Rose, Louisiana State 
University, USA)
09:00: Bernard Megrey and Ken Rose - Introduction
09:10: Invited Speaker - Michio J. Kishi, (Hokkaido University, Japan) - Comparison of 
Simulated Particle Fluxes using NEMURO and other ecosystem models in the 
western North Pacific 
09:40: Bernard Megrey - MENU ECOPATH comparisons: What did we learn? 
10:00 Kenneth Rose - Can we compare models without also considering the modeler?
10:20: Break
11:00: ECOPATH Regional Presentations
11:00: Invited Speaker - Georg Skaret (Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway) –
ECOPATH analysis of the Barents Sea Ecosystem 

=== PDF PAGE 17 ===
17
11:20: Invited Speaker - Alida Bundy (Department of Fisheries and Oceans, B.I.O., 
Canada) - ECOPATH analysis of the Labrador Shelf ecosystem
11:40: Invited Speaker - Kerim Aydin (NOAA Alaska Fisheries Science Center, USA) -
ECOPATH analysis of the Eastern Bering Sea ecosystem
12:00-13:30: Lunch
13:30: Invited Speaker - Vladimir Radchenko (Sakhalin Research Institute of Fisheries 
and Oceanography (SakhNIRO), Russia) - ECOPATH analysis of the Okhotsk 
Sea ecosystem
13:50: Invited Speaker - Olafur S. Astthorsson (Marine Research Institute, Iceland) -
ECOPATH analysis of the Iceland Sea ecosystem
14:10: Invited Speaker - Astrid Jarre (University of Cape Town, South Africa) (given by 
Kai Wieland) - ECOPATH analysis of the West Greenland ecosystem
14:30: Invited Speaker - Takashi Hakamada (Institute of Cetacean Research, Japan) -
ECOPATH analysis of the Oyashio Current ecosytem
14:50: Invited Speaker - Enrique Curchitser and Paul Budgell - A comparison of sea ice 
conditions in Sub-Arctic Seas over the last 50 years 
15:10: Break
15:40: Open Discussion - What is similar? What is different? Which systems should be 
considered for comparison? By what method?
16:40:Summary of ESSAS Annual Science Meeting and closing remarks (George Hunt, 
Ken Drinkwater)
Thursday, 18 September
Belle Isle Room
09:00: Discussion Session for WG-3, Modeling Ecosystem Responses: Future 
Directions of ESSAS WG-3 (Moderators: Bernard Megrey and Kenneth 
Rose)
10:30: Break
12:30: Adjourn
Thursday and Friday, 18 and 19 September
Vanguard 1 Room
09:00: ESSAS SSC and invited guests: Agenda to be provided
10:30: Break
12:30: Lunch 
14:00: Reconvene
15:30: Break
17:30: Adjourn

=== PDF PAGE 18 ===
18
Appendix 3: Extended Abstracts of Presentations
Session 1
Results from the 2007 Hakodate Workshops and Planning: Hotspots, Thresholds 
and Ice Models
Convener: George Hunt
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
A 50-year simulation of ice and ocean climate in the Bering Sea
Enrique Curchitser
Rutgers University, USA
Thresholds in warming Sub-Arctic Seas
John Bengtson
NOAA National Marine Mammal Laboratory, USA
Hotspots of biodiversity and aggregation in the Sub-Arctic Seas
George L. Hunt, Jr.
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA
The Sub-Arctic Seas support some of the greatest aggregations of marine birds and 
mammals in the Northern Hemisphere. In most cases, the distribution of breeding 
colonies, rookeries and haul-out sites are well documented. However, the information 
on the distribution and abundance of top predators at sea is scattered. Thus, it is of 
value to both review the mechanisms responsible for these aggregations, and to 
summarize what is known about the most important sites of aggregation in the Sub￾Arctic Seas. 
The identification of conservation hotspots in marine habitats has lagged those in the 
terrestrial realm. Among the first mention of biodiversity hotspots in marine 
environments, were tropical reefs and equatorial waters where biodiversity of large 
predatory fishes was high. However, in the high-latitude seas, biodiversity is most often 
low, but those species that are present can be in found in immense numbers in 
restricted areas, thus increasing their vulnerability to a variety of environmental insults. 

=== PDF PAGE 19 ===
19
The idea that aggregations of top predators should be considered as hot spots in the 
ocean was first broached by Cairns and Schneider (1980). The concept of aggregation 
hotspots in ocean environments was further explored by Sydeman et al. (2006) in a 
special issue of Deep-Sea Research Part II that was devoted to aggregation hotspots in 
the North Pacific Ocean. They, and several other authors in the volume, discussed the 
importance of areas where top predators concentrate to forage. These hotspots of 
trophic transfer vary in spatial scale from oceanic fronts crossing large portions the 
North Pacific, to eddies, heads of submarine canyons, and features where forage fish 
concentrate on a predictable basis. 
There is a need to identify areas of high trophic transfer, aggregation hotspots, in the 
Sub-Arctic Seas, as these may be important for the support of the large colonies and 
rookeries of breeding marine birds and mammals. In addition, major portions of the 
world population of several species of seabirds and marine mammals that breed in the 
low latitudes or the Southern Hemisphere migrate to high latitude waters in the Northern 
Hemisphere to forage in the austral winter. Aggregation hotspots provide the chance to 
investigate the mechanisms essential for supporting trophic transfer to marine animals 
with high metabolic demands, and their vulnerabilities to disruption (e.g., Table 1). 
When marine conservation efforts include the establishment of marine protected areas, 
identification of hotspots, whether they are areas of enhanced species richness or of 
aggregations of foraging predators, must be a first step.
In this paper, I examine the mechanisms that result in aggregation hotspots, the spatial 
and temporal scales at which the various types of aggregation hotspots exist, and the 
distribution of different types of aggregation hotspots in the Sub-Arctic Seas. 
References
Cairns, D.K. & Schneider, D.C. 1990. Hot spots in cold water: feeding habitat selection 
by Thick-billed Murres. Studies in Avian Biology 14: 52-60.
Sydeman, W.J., Brodeur, R.D., Bychkov, A.S., Grimes, C.B., McKinnell, S.M. (eds.), 
2006. Top predator “hotspots” in the North Pacific. Deep-Sea Research Part II 53 
(3-4).

=== PDF PAGE 20 ===
20
Table 1. Small-scale, process-oriented studies of seabird foraging in the Bering Sea and Aleutian 
Islands
Species or 
species 
group
Location Physical Mechanism Prey Reference
Multiple 
species
Pribilof Islands Tidal front Unknown Kinder et al., 1983
Multiple 
species
SE Bering Sea Oceanographic fronts Unknown Schneider et al., 
1987
Murres St. Matthew Island Tidal flow over a reef Euphausiids Hunt et al., 1988
Least auklets Chirikov Basin Front Copepods Hunt & Harrison, 
1990
Multiple 
species
Pribilof Islands Tidal Front Euphausiids, 
and other
Schneider et al., 
1990
Least auklets St. Lawrence Island Tidal front and 
pycnocline
Copepods Hunt et al., 1990
Multiple 
species
Chirikov Basin Grey Whale mud 
plumes
Benthic 
amphipods
Obst & Hunt, 1990
Murres St. George Island Tidal flow over a reef Euphausiids Coyle et al., 1992
Auklets Bering Sea & Aleutian 
Is.
Various (a review) N/A Hunt et al., 1993
Murres Pribilof Islands Tidal front Forage fish? Decker & Hunt, 
1996
Shearwaters Pribilof Islands Basins in reefs Euphausiids Hunt et al., 1996
Least auklets Bering Sea Various (a review) N/A Hunt, 1997
Least, 
crested & 
parakeet 
auklets
Delarof Islands, 
Aleutian Archipelago
Tidal flow over reef; 
convergence front
Copepods, 
euphausiids, 
other
Hunt et al., 1998
Multiple 
species
Anadyr Current, 
Chirikov Basin
Convergence fronts & 
passage over a bank
Copepods, 
euphausiids
Russell et al., 
1999
Murres Pribilof Domain pycnocline Forage fish? Swartzman et al., 
1999
Multiple 
Species
Central & eastern 
Aleutian passes
Tidal currents 
impinging on reefs; 
convergences
Copepods, 
euphausiids
Ladd et al., 2005
Multiple 
species
Central and eastern 
Aleutian passes
Tidal currents 
impinging on reefs; 
convergences
Copepods, 
euphausiids
Jahncke et al., 
2005b
Shearwaters, 
fulmars
Eastern Aleutians Tidal currents, 
convergences
Euphausiids Vlietstra et al., 
2005
Shearwaters Inner front, EBS Structural front Euphausiids Jahncke et al., 
2005a
Multiple 
species
Eastern & central 
Aleutian Islands
Tidal currents, fronts Copepods, 
euphausiids, 
other
Renner et al., 
2008

=== PDF PAGE 21 ===
21
Marine biodiversity hotspots: What have we learned so far?
Boris Worm
Dalhousie University, Canada
Session 2
Workshop on the Importance of Advective Processes in Sub-Arctic Seas
Convener: Ken Drinkwater
Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway)
Modeling the life cycle of Antarctic krill: the importance of advection
Sally Thorpe
British Antarctic Survey
The Southern Ocean is a key component of the global ocean circulation system. It 
connects the three major world oceans transferring between them heat, salt and 
nutrients. This physical connectivity has ecological importance in terms of population 
connection and distribution. The food webs in the Southern Ocean are typically short, 
often relying on one particular key species to provide the link from primary production to 
higher predators. The species varies according to location - here we focus on the food 
web centered on Antarctic krill, Euphausia superba Dana. A relatively small, long-lived
(up to 7 years) crustacean, it forms a key prey item of many higher marine predators 
particularly in the southwest Atlantic sector of the Southern Ocean where a large 
proportion of the circumpolar population of krill is found (Atkinson et al, 2008). Antarctic 
krill are vulnerable to physical forcing, particularly in the early life stages where not only 
the ocean but also sea ice provides a critical habitat. Field studies around South 
Georgia, an island in the north-east Scotia Sea, have shown that krill can be 
concentrated in frontal jets (Murphy et al, 2004). A comparison of the krill influx into the 
region with predator consumption and krill growth data demonstrated that the krill influx 
can at times match the local production and thus advection can be important for 
sustaining the local ecosystem (Hofmann & Murphy, 2004). Modeling studies have 
examined the temporal variability in the advection pathways to South Georgia; the 
probability and timing of krill reaching South Georgia can show large fluctuations 
particularly when the sea ice habitat is included (Thorpe et al, 2007). At a circumpolar 
scale, the association of the early life stages of krill with sea ice can substantially alter 
the oceanic advective pathways creating areas of retention and regions of more rapid 
transfer (Fig. 1). 
We are currently developing a coupled life cycle model for Antarctic krill in which 
functions for egg development, growth and spawning will be embedded into our 
advection model. This will allow us to identify key regions in the circumpolar Southern 
Ocean for the life stages of krill and provide further insight into the importance of 
advection on the distribution of the species.

=== PDF PAGE 22 ===
22
Fig.1. Near-surface advection pathways in the Southern Ocean illustrating the effect of 
including the sea ice habitat. Particles were released at the black dots and tracked for 3 
years. Trajectories are color-coded according to age (Pink: 0-1 yr, blue: 1-2 yr, green: 
2-3 yr). Two scenarios are shown: upper panel trajectories were generated using ocean 
velocity fields from OCCAM general circulation model; bottom panel trajectories were 
generated using the same OCCAM ocean velocities combined with satellite-derived sea 
ice motion fields. For further details, please see Thorpe et al (2007). 
References:
Atkinson A., V. Siegel, E.A. Pakhomov, P. Rothery, V. Loeb, R.M. Ross, L.B. Quetin, K. Schmidt, P. 
Fretwell, E.J. Murphy, G.S. Tarling, and A.H. Fleming. 2008. Oceanic circumpolar habitats 
of Antarctic krill. Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser., 362: 1–23, doi: 10.3354/meps07498. 
Hofmann, E.E. and E.J. Murphy. 2004. Advection, krill, and Antarctic marine ecosystems. 
Antarctic Sci., 16: 487–499.
Murphy, E.J., J.L. Watkins, M.P. Meredith, P. Ward, P.N. Trathan and S.E. Thorpe. 2004.
Southern Antarctic Circumpolar Current Front to the northeast of South Georgia: 
Horizontal advection of krill and its role in the ecosystem. J. Geophys. Res., 109, 
doi:10.1029/2002JC001522.
Thorpe, S. E., E. J. Murphy and J. L. Watkins. 2007. Circumpolar connections between Antarctic 
krill (Euphausia superb Dana) populations: investigating the roles of ocean and sea ice 
transport. Deep-Sea Res I, 54:792–810.

=== PDF PAGE 23 ===
23
Influence of advection on Calanus finmarchicus abundance across multiple 
scales
Andrew J. Pershing 
University of Maine and Gulf of Maine Research Institute, USA
By definition, the distribution of zooplankton is strongly influenced by physical 
processes. However, the role of advection changes as we move from fine to coarse 
scales. I reviewed the physical and biological processes influencing the copepod 
Calanus finmarchicus change across scales and how these patterns affect predators 
such as the endangered North Atlantic right whale. At scales of a few meters and a few 
hours, fine scale physical processes such as internal waves and boundary layer 
phenomena like Langmuir circulation can create patches of C. finmarchicus. However, 
the behavior of the copepods is essential in determining when and where a patch will 
form. At scales of a few kilometers and a few days, copepod swimming is too weak to 
affect the distribution. The time scale is also too short for changes in population growth 
rates to play a role. Thus, physical processes such as wind and tidal currents and the 
position of density fronts will have the strongest influence on copepod distribution. At 
scales on the order of a hundred kilometers and over several weeks, population 
dynamics can play a larger role. I explored the relative influence of growth rates 
(determined by temperature and chlorophyll) and circulation using a coupled physical￾biological model of C. finmarchicus. Experiments with the model suggest that changes 
in initial or boundary conditions are overwhelmed by variability in growth rates after 
approximately 50 days. Temperature has the largest effect on growth rate. Elevated 
chlorophyll during the late winter can lead to increased C. finmarchicus abundance 
during the spring, but the effect of variations in chlorophyll concentrations is secondary 
to the other inputs. At the largest scale considered, hundreds of kilometers and years, I 
found evidence for large scale coherence in abundance anomalies in regions ranging 
from the Mid Atlantic Bight to the Grand Banks.
Advective supply of offshore prey into the continental shelves in the Oyashio 
area: the role of tidal currents
Orio Yamamura, Akira Kusaka, and Tsuneo Ono
Hokkaido National Fisheries Research Institute, Fisheries Research Agency
Walleye pollock is the one of the key species in the Sub-Arctic NPO. Age-0 pollock 
settling in the Doto area, where is strongly affected by Oyashio current, attain a 
substantial density sometimes exceeding 100 individuals m-2. Such an extremely high 
density would suggest prey depletion because of high grazing impact, and is likely to be 
a constraint for growth and survival. Furthermore, reduced abundance of zooplankton 
prey would result in increased mortality because of cannibalism. A tropho-dynamic
model was constructed to analyze the bottom-up and top-down controls (Yamamura, 
2004). In the course of model construction, prey (euphausiids) population crashed 
immediately after the onset of simulation due to the predation impact of pollock. By 
assuming advective supply of offshore prey, the system showed a stable behavior. The 

=== PDF PAGE 24 ===
24
annual predation on euphausiids (22.5±5.3gm-2) exceeded the annual production 
(17.2±0.1gm-2) indicating that an advective supply of prey is essential to support the 
pollock population.
To elucidate the mechanism of offshore prey supply, a biophysical coupling survey has 
been carried out in the Oyashio area. An ADCP observation continued for 24.8 h 
revealed that the variance in cross-shore component of water flow in the bottom layer 
(30cms-1) was comparable to the surface velocity of Oyashio current (0.6 kt = 31cms￾1). This result indicates that tidal current is capable of transporting meso-zooplankton
prey from the offshore into the coastal waters in the Oyashio area.
Advective processes in the Bering Sea
George L. Hunt, Jr. 1
, Phyllis J. Stabeno2 and Rebecca Woodgate3
1 School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, USA
2
NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory
3
Applied Physics Laboratory, University of Washington, USA
The eastern Bering Sea is a seasonally ice-covered, high-latitude shelf sea, dependent 
on advection for heat and for replenishment of nutrients on its shelf. Water from the 
North Pacific Ocean enters the Bering Sea via passes through the Aleutian Islands 
(Figure 1). Water from the Alaska Coastal Current, enters the Bering through passes in 
the eastern Aleutian Islands, in particular through Unimak Pass and Samalga Pass. 
Water from the Alaskan Stream enters the Bering Sea farther west, primarily through 
Amukta and Amchitka Passes, both of which are broad (>50 km) and deep (>400 m). 
Water entering through Unimak Pass either flows along the 100 m isobath to the 
northwest, or along the 50 m isobath (Inner Front) to the east. Water entering the 
Bering between Unimak Pass and Amchitka Island mostly turns eastward to form the 
Aleutian North Slope current. As this current encounters the southeastern shelf just 
northwest of Unimak Pass, it turns northwest to form the Bering Slope Current that 
eventually turns west and then south to form the Kamchatka Current that exits the 
Bering Sea through Near Pass. Water also exits the Bering Sea through Bering Strait 
(Figure 2). Flows entering the Arctic from the Bering carry fresh water, salt, and heat, 
and thus impact the hydrography of the Arctic Ocean. In winter, flows through Bering 
Strait can reverse, with the result that Arctic ice may be advected into the northern 
Bering, although it is believed that by the end of the winter, the net flux of ice is 
northward.
In the southeastern Bering Sea, most on-shelf flows are weak, and cross-shelf currents 
are dominated by the tidal signal. The exception to this is the weak (~5 cm s-1) flow 
along the 50-m isobath which transports water from area around Unimak Pass towards 
Bristol Bay. Cross-shelf flows are further inhibited by the presence of bathymetrically￾fixed fronts along the 50 m (inner Front), 100m (Middle Front) and 200 m (Shelf-edge 
Front). Farther north, off-shelf fluxes of fresh water have been detected north of 
Nunivak Island, whereas in the vicinity of St. Lawrence Island, on-shelf fluxes of 

=== PDF PAGE 25 ===
25
nutrient-rich water from the outer shelf and slope are transported both through Anadyr 
Strait to the west of St. Lawrence Island, around St. Lawrence Island and thence 
northward east of the island to Bering Strait (Figure 2).
Strong tidal currents in the vicinity of the Pribilof Islands are rectified, and result in both 
the advection of outer shelf and shelf-edge waters to the Pribilof Islands, and the 
subsequent retention of these waters within the Pribilof Domain (Figure 3). These 
processes are important for the presence of nutrient-rich water and new production in 
the Pribilof Domain throughout the post-bloom summer season, when elsewhere on the 
southern shelf, strong stratification inhibits mixing of nutrients into the upper mixed 
layer, which has little post-bloom new production. 
Advection of zooplankton that originates in the basin occurs at the heads of canyons, in 
the vicinity of the Pribilof Islands, and in the northern Bering to the southwest of St. 
Lawrence Island. These on-shelf fluxes of zooplankton are important for supporting 
large colonies of planktivorous seabirds on the Pribilof Islands and at St. Lawrence 
Island, as well as on islands to the north as far as Bering Strait. When zooplankton-rich 
waters are unavailable near the Pribilof Islands and St. Lawrence Island, planktivorous 
birds nesting there may experience reproductive failure.
Figure 1. General circulation patterns in the eastern Bering Sea. (From Stabeno et al., 
2001, Fisheries Oceanography 10: 81-98).

=== PDF PAGE 26 ===
26

=== PDF PAGE 27 ===
27
Figure 3. Rectified tidal circulation around the Pribilof Islands creates a region with 
enhanced nutrient and zooplankton concentrations that can be physically defined as the 
Pribilof Domain (From Hunt et al., 2008, Deep-Sea Research II, 55: 1919-1944).
Effects of advection on the East and West Greenland shelf: Implications of 
transport for the recruitment of Atlantic cod and Northern shrimp in Greenland 
waters
Kai Wieland
National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark
Transport of early life stages by ocean currents is an essential process for many marine 
fish and shellfish species. This is also the case for Atlantic cod and Northern shrimp in 
Greenland waters. For cod, active migration back to the original spawning areas is well 
documented and hence larval transport may occur over larger distances than it is likely 
for shrimp as intensive spawning migration against the currents is probably not possible 
for this species.

=== PDF PAGE 28 ===
28
Direct observation on cod eggs and larvae are scarce in the East Greenland area, and 
the only sample series with intensive area coverage were the international 
NORWESTLANT surveys in 1963. In addition, information on the distribution of pelagic 
juveniles is available from Icelandic 0-group surveys. Results derived from these 
surveys indicate that cod eggs drift from SW Iceland towards Denmark Strait and that a 
part of larvae in some years continue to drift across the Denmark Strait and settle on the 
East Greenland shelf. Cod eggs spawned at Southeast Greenland are transported 
around the southern tip of Greenland and settle on the West Greenland shelf. Results 
from plankton surveys conducted by Greenland and the former GDR in the 1960s and 
1970s suggest that the offspring from cod spawning grounds at Southwest Greenland 
are transported northward along the shelf but a considerable portion may also end up in 
the western part of the Davis Strait becoming lost for recruitment of the West Greenland 
cod stock. Back migration of maturing cod is documented based on tagging 
experiments while correspondence between the output from particle tracking models 
and observed 0-group distribution and recruitment is poor. The latter is most likely due 
to inappropriate assumptions concerning the biological part in the model. 
Hatching areas of shrimp larvae are not well known but bottom trawl survey give 
indication for the location of settling areas. Mean currents suggest transport of shrimp 
larvae over large distances. However, back-migration of adults to keep the population 
‘in balance’ has not been observed. Vertical distribution of shrimp larvae changes during 
larval phase and is temperature-dependent (about 80 to 120 days at West Greenland). 
Realistic representation of the change in vertical distribution may result in considerably 
shorter transport paths than actual model results suggest as it has been seen e.g. for 
the Barents Sea. However, the necessary input data for such model runs do not exist 
for West Greenland to date.
References
Wieland, K. and H. Hovgård. 2002. Distribution and drift of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) 
eggs and larvae in Greenland offshore waters. J. Northw. Atl. Fish.Sci. 30: 61-76.
Logemann, K., I.H. Harms and J.O. Backhaus. 2004. Simulating change and variability 
of transport pathways in Icelandic waters. Poster. ICES Symposium: “The 
influence of climate change on North Atlantic fish stocks, 11-14 May, Bergen.
Ribergaard, M.H., S.A. Pedersen, B. Ådlandsvik and N. Kliem. 2004. Modeling the 
ocean circulation on the West Greenland shelf with special emphasis on northern 
shrimp recruitment. Cont. Shelf Res. 24: 1505-1519.
Session 3
Workshop on Climate Forcing of Marine Ecosystems
Convener: James Overland
NOAA Pacific Marine Environmental Laboratory, USA

=== PDF PAGE 29 ===
29
The Ecosystem Response to Future Climate Change in the Sub-Arctic Atlantic
Ken Drinkwater
Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway
Under future climate change due to anthropogenic sources, it is projected that 
temperatures will warm throughout the globe with the maximum warming in the Polar 
Regions and only slightly less in Sub-Arctic regions. Precipitation as well will change 
with expected increases in many of the Sub-Arctic regions although with high spatial 
variability in the amplitude of change. Ice coverage will shrink and fronts between Arctic 
and Sub-Arctic waters will likely shift northwards. These changes in the physical 
environment will have important impacts on the ecology of the Sub-Arctic regions.
Fig.1. The arrows indicate the predicted distributional shifts in several of the major fish 
species in the NE Atlantic (taken from the chapter on marine systems (Loeng et 
al., 2005) in the ACIA report). Note that all of these changes have been 
observed during the last few years due to the recent warming, well in advance of 
the full extent of climate change. 
In Sub-Arctic areas where ice coverage will be reduced, there will likely be increased 
primary production due to increased light conditions over a longer period of time. 
Distributional shifts in zooplankton are expected with Arctic species retreating northward 
while temperate species will expand to the north (Fig. 1). The timing of seasonal 
migrations is expected to change with earlier arrival and later departures. The changes 
in standing stocks and production of zooplankton are more difficult to predict. Where 
Arctic Waters are replaced or diluted, the Arctic zooplankton species such as Calanus 
glacialis and C. hyperboreous will likely decrease, on the other hand C. finmarchicus

=== PDF PAGE 30 ===
30
that is associated more with Atlantic waters will likely increase while the overall effect is 
uncertain. Distributional shifts northward of fish are expected. Based on temperature 
changes alone, Atlantic cod is expected to extent farther north (and in the Barents Sea 
farther eastward; Fig. 1) than at present while polar cod may disappear from the Sub￾Arctic regions and retreat into the Arctic Ocean. Proportionately more spawning will 
occur in northern regions for some species such as cod and new spawning sites may be 
established. The latter is likely to occur in those areas where spawning habitat is 
available and where the species has to move farther north to follow their prey. Ocean 
habitat is expected to decrease for some species such as Atlantic salmon off eastern 
North America, while for others it will increase such as Norwegian spring-spawning 
herring in the Norwegian Sea. Fish abundance is expected to increase for species like 
herring and cod due to improved growth rates under warmer conditions and improved 
recruitment. On the other hand, at the southern limit of their distribution, some species 
will likely decline due to lower growth rates and declining recruitment. There will be 
invasions of new southern species into the Sub-Arctic regions with the potential to 
change substantially trophic interactions through predator-prey relationships and even 
community structure. For example, Atlantic mackerel have been moving northward 
during recent years and could soon enter the Barents Sea. This fish could change the 
interactions between the present three major species there, i.e. the cod, capelin and 
herring. For example, they might begin to feed on cod eggs and larvae significantly 
reducing their numbers as have been seen in other Sub-Arctic regions. In some Sub￾Arctic regions such as the Barents Sea, the Arctic ecosystems where diatom blooms 
lead to C. glacialis production that in turn are feed upon by numerous seabirds such as 
dovekies and little auks could be replaced by diatom and flagellate blooms leading in 
succession to C. finmarchicus, forage fish such as herring, up through to whales. Ice￾dependent marine mammals such as some species of seals, walruses and polar bears 
will suffer as the ice disappears. The changes due to climate change will, in addition, 
depend upon the level of fishing intensity and must be considered in developing future 
scenarios for fish populations. The ecological responses to climate change will in some 
cases be are likely to be non-linear therefore adding to the complexity. For example, 
thermal thresholds may be passed that either will prevent a species from inhabiting a 
region or, for other species, allowing it to survive where previously it could not. While 
we may be able to make reasonable estimates on what may happen to a particular 
functional group, projections for specific species will be much more uncertain. One 
thing for certain is that we can expect many surprises.
To improve our ecological scenarios, we need improved regional models with 
projections of what will happen in regards to the physical oceanography of the regions. 
We also need improved understanding of the processes linking climate variability and 
changes to ecosystem responses, including threshold limits. Biophysical models that 
include the high trophic levels (above zooplankton) are needed. While such models are 
beginning to appear much more work is needed in this area. Finally, more research into 
the interactions of fishing (top-down) and climate (bottom-up) on the ecology of Sub￾Arctic ecosystems is needed.

=== PDF PAGE 31 ===
31
Climate prediction: IPCC 4th Assessment Report and beyond
Vladimir Kattsov
Voeikov Main Geophysical Observatory, St. Petersburg, Russia
An unprecedented model experiment was undertaken in the course of preparation of the 
IPCC 4th Assessment Report: climate simulations and projections using 23 models from
11 countries were provided for a comprehensive international analysis – under about 
1200 diagnostic projects. The geographical pattern of projected global warming has not 
changed qualitatively since 1970s. However, encouraging improvements can be noted 
in the state-of-the-art climate models themselves; computational strategies; methods of 
model evaluation; understanding of climate processes and feedbacks; and therefore the 
credibility of the projections. In spite of the evident progress, uncertainties of climate 
projections are still very significant. Major sources of the uncertainties remain: (1) 
uncertainties in future emissions of GHG and aerosols, and their conversion to 
atmospheric concentrations, and further – to radiative forcing of the climate; (2) 
uncertainties in the global and regional climate responses to a radiative forcing in 
different GCMs; (3) uncertainties due to insufficient resolution of AOGCMs and different 
methods of downscaling AOGCM results; (4) uncertainties due to forced and unforced 
natural variability. Varying sets of strengths and weaknesses that models display lead to 
the conclusion that no single model can be considered “best”; it is important to utilize 
results from a suite of models. Improved computational strategies, e.g. larger 
ensembles of simulations, and multi-model ensembles have started to play an 
increasingly important role in addressing unforced variability, as well as in 
understanding processes responsible for the range of model results. Having the large 
inter-model differences in sensitivity to external forcing, a quantitative likelihood 
weighting of different models in multi-model ensembles should improve credibility of the 
climate projections. The possibility that metrics based on observations might be used to 
constrain model projections of climate change has been explored in the IPCC AR4 for 
the first time, through the analysis of ensembles of model simulations. “Nevertheless, a 
proven set of model metrics that might be used to narrow the range of plausible climate 
projections has yet to be developed” (IPCC, 2007). While it has become evident that 
future progress in ensemble climate prediction requires an objective discrimination of 
models, it is not quite clear how such discrimination can be made. There is emerging
evidence that model selection (metrics) for an ensemble, as well as an “optimum” size 
of the ensemble may be problem-/region-/variable-dependent. Some of the results 
presented here were obtained within the Russian Federal Targeted Research Program
“World Ocean” and under projects supported by the US NSF via IARC/UAF and by the 
RFBR. The modeling groups are acknowledged for making their simulations available 
for analysis, the Program for Climate Model Diagnosis and Inter-comparison (PCMDI) 
for collecting and archiving the CMIP3 model output, and the WCRP's Working Group 
on Coupled Modeling (WGCM) for organizing the model data analysis activity. The 
WCRP CMIP3 multi-model dataset is supported by the Office of Science, US 
Department of Energy. 

=== PDF PAGE 32 ===
32
Statistical and Dynamical Downscaling: Examples and Strategies for the 
Northeast Pacific
Mike Foreman
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Sidney BC
This presentation briefly described projects and plans for statistical and dynamical 
downscaling in the Northeast Pacific by Fisheries and Oceans Canada (FOC). Those 
interested in more details should view the online version of the presentation or contact 
the author.
The primary reason for downscaling is that the resolution of most global climate models 
is too coarse to capture regional climate effects. In continental shelf waters of the 
Northeast Pacific, the most notable feature requiring better resolution is upwelling. To 
that end, a collaborative project between FOC and the Canadian Centre for Climate 
Modelling and Analysis has been undertaken to statistically downscale winds off the
coast of British Columbia (Merryfield et al. 2008). Time series of up to fifty years exist at 
fifteen offshore weather buoys and first used to evaluate the accuracy of eighteen global 
model winds through comparisons over periods of up to 12 years. Results from the 
Canadian Regional Climate model (45 km resolution at 60°N) and a 15km resolution 
regional climate model from the University of Washington (Salathé et al, 2008) were 
also included in some of these evaluations. Not surprisingly, the UW model was the 
most accurate in the Strait of Georgia, a roughly 30 km wide channel that is flanked by 
mountains to both its east and west. It generally did the best job in reproducing average 
monthly wind magnitudes and directions and capturing the seasonal cycle. Though 
future projections for the regional climate models are yet to be examined, those for the 
eighteen global models on average only showed about a 5% increase in wind 
magnitude and a 2° clockwise rotation in direction. 
FOC has recently provided funding for two projects that will employ atmospheric forcing 
from the foregoing global or regional climate models to drive regional ocean climate 
models. The first is the “Strait of Georgia in 2030”, a project whose primary goal is to 
better understand and anticipate changes in the marine ecosystem of the strait. A one￾km, ROMS-based, circulation model coupled to a NPZD biological model is being 
developed and will be linked to one or more higher level trophic models. More 
information can be obtained from http://www-sci.pac.dfo￾mpo.gc.ca/sogeri/default_e.htm.
The second project is the development of a 3-km regional climate model for the shelf 
and near offshore region extending from the Columbia River to the Alaskan Panhandle. 
This model will also be ROMS-based and may provide oceanic boundary conditions to 
the Strait of Georgia model. Oceanic boundary conditions for this larger model will either 
be taken from the nested Northeast Pacific regional climate model under development 
by Enrique Curchitser and colleagues at Rutgers University and NCAR, or down-scaled 
values from global climate models. Given the importance of river discharges and 
estuarine flows within both model domains, it will also be important to incorporate 

=== PDF PAGE 33 ===
33
projected changes in those phenomena, probably via statistical downscaling techniques 
similar to those described in Morrison et al. (2008).
To summarize, both statistical and dynamical downscaling efforts are underway as part 
of FOC climate change projects in the waters off British Columbia.
References
Merryfield, W.J., B. Pal, and M.G.G. Foreman. 2008. Future projected changes in 
surface marine winds of the west coast of Canada. Submitted to J. Geophysical 
Research.
Morrison, J., M.C. Quick, and M.G.G. Foreman. 2002. Climate change in the Fraser watershed: 
Flow and temperature predictions. J. Hydrology, 263: 230-244.
Salathé, E.P. Jr., R. Steed, C.F. Mass, and P.H. Zahn. 2008. A high-resolution climate 
model for the United States Pacific Northwest, Part II: Meso-scale feedbacks and 
local responses to climate change. J. Climate, in press.
Physical and Biological Oceanographic modeling of the Canadian East coast and 
Arctic shelves
Simon Prinsenberg
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Bedford Institute of Oceanography, Dartmouth, 
NS.
Personnel at the Bedford Institute of Oceanography (BIO) use coupled physical￾biological oceanographic models validated by observations to simulate the processes in 
the marine and pack ice ecosystems. The model domains range from the Arctic and 
North Atlantic and include sub-grid models of the Canadian Arctic Archipelago (CAA), 
the Baffin Bay – Labrador Sea region, Gulf of St. Lawrence and the Nova Scotia coastal 
waters. The ESSAS presentation will concentrate on three models: the finite element 
model with an example from the CAA where the model is used to simulate locations of 
sensible polynyas, the large and regional OPA model and the POM east coast model 
forecasting both ice and ocean fields. The coupled ice-ocean POM model is used by the 
Canadian Ice Service to forecast ice conditions and iceberg populations along the 
Labrador and Newfoundland coasts. It also is used determine the phytoplankton bloom 
depth by assimilating surface chlorophyll distributions determined by remote sensing 
data.
The finite element in the Arctic started as a tidal model and was connected to other 
models to form a seamless tidal height and tidal current forecast-hind cast model that is 
being run by BIO personnel on the DFO-Maritimes Website. It was used to explain the 
location of tidally-driven sensible polynyas in the CAA, based on two parameters: tidal 
mixing and tidal upwelling to bring the warm deeper water to the surface to prevent ice 
formation. The OPA model simulations were compared within the CAA to 8-year of 
mooring data collected in western Lancaster Sound, the centre of the NW Passage. The 
model simulates the seasonal and inter-variability of the observed fluxes. The fluxes 

=== PDF PAGE 34 ===
34
have a max in the summer, a min in the fall and second minor max in late winter. 
Analysis determined that the flux variability is generated by the far-field wind stress in 
the Beaufort Sea some 100km away that sets ups the sea level gradient along the NW 
Passage within the CAA. In contrast, the variability of the east-to-west location of the 
ice-arches within Lancaster Sound is generated by local atmospheric conditions 
(temperature and wind). Since the ice arches are locations of high biological production, 
models are being developed to simulate the present ice arch locations and possibly the 
expected general westwards shift due to climate warming. 
Validation of Dynamical Downscaling of Ice and Ocean Conditions in the Barents 
and Nordic Seas
W. Paul Budgell1,2,3, Vidar S. Lien1,2 and Arne Melsom4
1
Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway
2
Bjerknes Centre for Climate Research, Bergen, Norway
3
Department of Physics and Physical Oceanography,
 Memorial University of Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, Canada
4
Norwegian Meteorological Institute, Oslo, Norway
Results from the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) are being downscaled to examine projected changes in ocean 
and ice conditions in the Barents and Nordic Seas. The GISS AOM (NASA Goddard 
Institute for Space Studies Atmosphere-Ocean Model) results are being downscaled 
using the coupled ice-ocean Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS). Before future 
climate scenarios are considered, we wished to assess the realism of downscaled
present-day results. Original and downscaled results from the climate of the twentieth 
century (20C3M) scenario are compared with available observations of ocean and ice 
conditions in the Barents and Nordic Seas. We wish to determine how well the 
downscaled results represent twentieth century climate and whether the downscaling 
improves (provides added value to) the IPCC model results.
Although the spatial resolution of the GISS AOM model, at 4° Х 4°, is very coarse, the 
model was selected for downscaling because it was found by Overland and Wang 
(2007) to be one of only three models in the IPCC that provided realistic descriptions of
sea ice in both the Barents sea and Arctic Ocean as a whole for the twentieth century. 
Interestingly, the GISS AOM seems to produce a realistic basin-scale wind-stress curl 
for the North Atlantic, since the downscaled Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation 
(AMOC) at 14.2 sievert (Sv) is in good agreement with the observed 16 Sv. Recently, 
Sandø and Furevik (2008) have shown that it is the large-scale wind stress curl in the 
North Atlantic that largely determines the Atlantic inflow to the Nordic Seas. Thus, the 
coarse resolution of the atmospheric fields from the GISS AOM should not seriously 
impact the quality of the downscaled ocean circulation fields.
In general, it was found that where the GISS AOM produced realistic results, the 
downscaled results were also in good agreement with observations. Conversely, when 

=== PDF PAGE 35 ===
35
the GISS AOM results were of poor quality, the downscaled results tended to be in poor 
agreement with observations. The major exception to this tendency is where the higher 
spatial resolution of the downscaling regional model permitted the resolution of 
topographic effects and representation of finer-scale circulation features that were not 
present in the coarse-resolution climate model. In particular, the regional model 
produced a very accurate estimate of net Atlantic Water inflow to the Barents of 1.8 Sv. 
This enhanced transport produced more accurate descriptions of sea ice distribution 
(less ice) and ocean temperature (warmer) than the climate model in the eastern 
Barents.
While the downscaled Barents inflow is in good agreement with observations, the 
Atlantic inflow to the Nordic Seas is underestimated by 50%. This appears to be 
attributable in equal parts to too weak wind forcing and too strong topographic blocking 
of the inflow by ridge topography. A parallel experiment using ERA40 atmospheric 
forcing instead of that from the GISS AOM showed a 25% increase in the inflow. 
Another experiment with NCEP forcing and smoother topography and coarser resolution 
produced excellent agreement with observations. We hypothesize that the topographic 
blocking of the inflow is likely due to the fact that while the topographic length scale is 
resolved by the regional model, the eddy dynamics are not. Thus, an enhanced 
potential vorticity barrier is produced at the ridges by the higher spatial resolution, but 
the resolution is still not high enough to permit exchanges by eddy fluxes across the 
ridges.
References
Overland, J. E. and M. Y. Tang. 2007. Future regional Arctic sea ice declines, Geophys. 
Res. Lett., di:10.1029/2007GL030808.
Sandø, A.B. and T. Furevik, 2008. Relation between the wind stress curl in the North 
Atlantic and the
Atlantic inflow to the Nordic Seas, J. Geophys. Res.-Oceans, di: 
10.1029/2007JC004236.
Strengths and Weaknesses in Recent Regional Ocean Modeling: Summary and 
Discussion
Mike Foreman
Institute of Ocean Sciences, Fisheries and Oceans Canada, Sidney BC, V8L 4B2, 
Canada
As the title suggests, this presentation was intended to summarize some of the 
attributes and pitfalls of regional climate modeling that were given earlier in the session. 
The convenor started things off by reviewing a few practical issues that must be 
addressed in developing and running regional climate models (RCMs). These include: 
a) One or two-way nesting?
b) A coupled atmosphere-ocean-ice model or only ocean?
c) Sensitivities to the RCM domain and location

=== PDF PAGE 36 ===
36
d) Lateral boundary conditions (with 1-way nesting)
e) “Big-brother” sensitivity experiments to determine the extent to which results are due 
to higher resolution.
He then followed with a summary of some limitations/caveats of regional modelling that 
were pointed out in a paper by Leung et al. (2003). 
These are:
a) Global Climate Model (GCM) parameterizations may not be valid for RCMs
a. Need to determine what processes should be resolved and what should be 
parameterized.
b) Does climate variability increase with spatial resolution?
a. Maybe, but only to a point
b. More ensemble runs are needed to improve the signal-to-noise ratio
c) What aspects of large–scale conditions need to be correctly simulated in order to 
enable successful downscaling?
d) We should use multiple GCMs with multiple ensembles to force multiple RCMs
a. Yes but making all these runs may exceed available computer capacity
e) Many CGMs ignore important processes like land use change and biogeochemical 
effects of CO2
a. Most next generation IPPC models will have CO2 cycle
Finally, he summarized a recent paper by Laprise et al. (2008) that challenges some 
popular tenets of RCMs. These tenets, and the answer to whether or not each is true, 
are given as follows: 
a) RCMs are capable of generating small-scale features absent in the driving fields 
supplied as lateral boundary conditions. Yes 
b) The small scales that are generated have the appropriate amplitudes and climate 
statistics. Yes, for mid-latitude climate statistics but a minimum domain size needed
c) The generated small scales accurately represent those that would be present in the 
driving data if it were not limited by resolution. Except for short time scales when 
these scales are in boundary and initial fields, no. But that may not matter as it is 
statistics, not event sequence that matters, and those are good. 
d) In performing dynamical downscaling, RCM generated small scales are universally 
defined for a given set of lateral boundary conditions. No
e) Opposing views of large scale features:
a. They are unaffected in the RCM domain. No
b. They may be improved due to reduced truncation and explicit treatment of meso￾scale resolution. Maybe ( this has been demonstrated in weather prediction)
c. Scales larger than the RCM domain are degraded. Yes 
Interested readers were referred to the Laprise et al. (2008) and Leung et al. (2003) 
papers for further details.
A broader discussion involving many in the audience then followed. Some of the 
important points raised were as follows:
1. Enrique emphasized the importance of two-way coupling with his example for 
upwelling off the California and Oregon coasts. The more highly resolved cold 

=== PDF PAGE 37 ===
37
upwelled waters in the RCM will feed back to produce fog in the atmosphere, which 
will then shade solar radiation and cause further cooling. Coarser GCMs couldn’t be 
expected to get the magnitudes and spatial extent of these feedbacks correctly.
References
Laprise, R., R. de Elía, D. Caya, S. Biner, P. Lucas-Picher, E. P. Diaconescu, M. Leduc, 
A. Alexandru and L. Separovic, 2008: Challenging some tenets of Regional 
Climate Modelling. Meteor. Atmos. Phys., 100, 3-22.
Leung, L.R., L.O. Mearns, F. Giorgi and R.L. Wilby. 2003. Regional climate research: 
Needs and opportunities. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society. 
84(1):89-95, 2003 Jan. 
Session 4
Workshop on Modeling Ecosystem Response
Conveners: Bernard Megrey, NOAA Alaska Fisheries Science Center, USA
 Shin-ichi Ito, Tohoku, National Fisheries Research Institute, Japan &
 Kenneth Rose, Louisiana State University, USA
A Comparison of Simulated Particle Fluxes Using NEMURO and Other Ecosystem 
Models in the Western North Pacific
MICHIO J. KISHI1, 2
, Takeshi Okunishi3
1
Graduate School of Fisheries Sciences, Hokkaido University, Japan
2
Frontier Research System for Global Change, Japan
3
Tohoku National Fisheries Research Institute, Fisheries Research Agency, Japan
This is a result from Kishi et al. (2004) and Okunishi et al. (2007). In Kishi et al. (2004) 
they pointed out that JGOFS revealed the importance of marine biological activity to the 
global carbon cycle. Ecological models are valuable tools for improving our 
understanding of biogeochemical cycles. Through a series of workshops, the North 
Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICES) developed NEMURO (North Pacific 
Ecosystem Model Understanding Regional Oceanography, Kishi et al. (2007)) a model, 
specifically designed to simulate the lower trophic ecosystem in the North Pacific 
Ocean. Its ability to simulate vertical fluxes generated by biological activities has not yet 
been validated. Here compare NEMURO with several other lower trophic level models 
of the northern North Pacific. The different ecosystem models are each embedded in a 
common three-dimensional physical model, and the simulated vertical flux of POM and 
the biomass of phytoplankton are compared. The models compared are: (1) NEMURO, 
(2) the Kishi and Nakata Model (Kishi et al., 1981), (3) KKYS (Kawamiya, et al., 1995, 
2000a, 2000b), and (4) the Denman model (Denman and Peña, 2002). With simple 
NPZD models, it is difficult to describe the production of POM (Particulate Organic 
Matter) and hence the simulations of vertical flux are poor. However, if the parameters 
are properly defined, the primary production can be well reproduced, even though none 

=== PDF PAGE 38 ===
38
of models we used here includes iron limitation effects. On the whole, NEMURO gave a 
satisfactory simulation of the vertical flux of POM in the northern North Pacific.
Okunishi et al. (2007) described that they applied a three-dimensional ecosystem￾physical coupled model including iron the effect to the Okhotsk Sea. In order to clarify 
the sources of iron, four dissolved iron compartments, based on the sources of supply, 
were added to (Kawamiya et al. 1995) an ecological-physical coupled model applied to 
Station Papa. (Journal of Oceanography, 51, 635-664) model (KKYS) to create our 
ecosystem model (KKYS-Fe). We hypothesized that four processes supply iron to sea 
water: atmospheric loadings from Northeastern Asia, input from the Amur River, 
dissolution from sediments and regeneration by zooplankton and bacteria. We 
simulated one year, from 1 January 2001 to 31 December 2001, using both KKYS-Fe 
and KKYS. KKYS could not reproduce the surface nitrate distribution after the spring 
bloom, whereas KKYS-Fe agreed well with observations in the northwestern Pacific 
because it includes iron limitation of phytoplankton growth. During the spring bloom, the 
main source of iron at the sea surface is from the atmosphere. The contribution of 
riverine iron to the total iron utilized for primary production is small in the Okhotsk Sea. 
Atmospheric deposition, the iron flux from sediment and regeneration of iron in the 
water column play important roles in maintaining high primary production in the Okhotsk 
Sea.
References
Denman, K.L. and M.A. Peña. 2002. The response of two coupled one-dimensional 
mixed layer/planktonic ecosystem models to climate change in the NE Sub-Arctic
Pacific Ocean. Deep-Sea Research, II, 49, 5739-5757.
Kawamiya, M., M.J. Kishi, Y. Yamanaka and N. Suginohara. 1995. An ecological￾physical coupled model applied to Station Papa. Journal of Oceanography, 51,
635-664.
Kawamiya, M., M.J. Kishi and N. Suginohara. 2006a. An ecosystem model for the North 
Pacific embedded in a general circulation model. Part I: Model description and 
characteristics of spatial distributions of biological variables. Journal of Marine 
Systems, 25, 129-157.
Kawamiya, M., M.J. Kishi and N. Suginohara. 2000b. An ecosystem model for the North 
Pacific embedded in a general circulation model, Part II: Mechanisms forming 
seasonal variations of chlorophyll. Journal of Marine System, 25, 159-178.
Kishi, M.J., K. Nakata and K. Shikawa. 1981. Sensitivity analysis of a coastal marine 
ecosystem. Journal of the Oceanographic Society of Japan, 37,120-134.
Kishi, M.J., T. Okunishi and Y. Yamanaka. 2004. A Comparison of Simulated Particle 
Fluxes using NEMURO and other ecosystem models in the western North Pacific. 
Journal of Oceanography, 60 63-73.

=== PDF PAGE 39 ===
39
Kishi, M.J., D.L. Eslinger, M. Kashiwai, B.A. Megrey, D.M. Ware, F.E. Werner, M.N. 
Aita, T. Azumaya, M. Fujii, S. Hashimoto, D. Huang, H. Iizumi, Y. Ishida, S. Kang, 
G.A. Kantakov, H. Kiml, K. Komatsu, V.V. Navrotsky, S.L. Smith, K. Tadokoro, A. 
Tsuda, O. Yamamura, Y. Yamanaka, K. Yokouchi, N. Yoshie, J. Zhang, Y.I. 
Zuenko and V.I. Zvansky. 2007. NEMURO―a lower trophic level model for the 
North Pacific marine ecosystem. Ecological Modeling, 202, 12-25.
Okunishi, T., M.J. Kishi, Y. Ono, T. Yamashita. 2007. A lower trophic ecosystem model 
including iron effect in the Okhotsk Sea, Continental Shelf Res., 27, 2080-2098.
MENU ECOPATH comparisons: What did we learn?
Bernard A. Megrey
NOAA Alaska Fisheries Science Center, USA
Results from the ESSAS-sponsored project Marine Ecosystems of Norway and the US 
(MENU), a collaborative project between NOAA/NMFS and Norway’s Institute of Marine 
Research, were reviewed. Special emphasis was devoted to lessons learned from a 
detailed comparative analysis of ecosystem structure and function. Information projects 
from the Northern Hemisphere marine ecosystems including eastern Bering Sea, Gulf of 
Alaska, Gulf of Main/Georges Bank, and the Norwegian/Barents Sea ecosystems were 
compared with respect to the environment, biota, fisheries, tropho-dynamics, common 
features, unique features, fundamental features, important drivers, and controlling 
processes. The wealth of data permitted several avenues for performing comparisons. 
Some comparisons that were examined included comparisons between geographically 
adjacent ecosystems (i.e. between the eastern Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska), between 
ecosystems (i.e. eastern Bering Sea and Barents Sea), and cross-basin (Atlantic vs. 
Pacific) comparisons. One outcome was the conclusion that large multi-national 
collaborations are almost essential to conduct similar comparisons since local experts 
are needed to supply data, interpret results, and provide perspective. 
Summary of the presentation ’Ecosystem modeling of the Norwegian Sea and the 
Barents Sea’
Georg Skaret
Institute of Marine Research, Norway
The Norwegian and Barents Sea ecosystems are different in many aspects; the 
Norwegian Sea is basically a basin area (average depth ca. 1800 m) whereas the 
Barents is a shelf area (average depth ca. 230 m). Moreover, large parts of the Barents 
are heavily influenced by the dynamics of seasonal ice cover. Still, there are good 
reasons for treating the two systems as one in an Ecopath with Ecosim modeling 
approach. Firstly, the two ecosystems are tightly linked together through the Atlantic 
current and the Coastal current which again largely affect the biota of both systems. 
Huge amounts of plankton, in particular Calanus and krill, are advected into the Barents 
with the Atlantic current, whereas larvae from some of the most important fish stocks 

=== PDF PAGE 40 ===
40
including Norwegian spring spawning herring (NSS-herring; Clupea harengus), North 
East Arctic cod (NEA cod; gadus morhua) and saithe (Pollachius virens) drift from the 
spawning areas in the Norwegian Sea into the nursery areas in the Barents with the 
Coastal current. In addition, the large whales migrate freely between the Norwegian Sea 
and the Barents during the summer feeding season. 
With both the Barents and the Norwegian Sea included, the total modeling area 
constitutes 3.116 million km2 and the area stretches from latitude N 63 to 81° and
longitude W 11 to E 68°. There are three main current systems of different origin 
dominating the ecosystems; the Arctic, Atlantic and Coastal currents. The water masses 
of the currents differ in quality and provide different conditions for production. These 
water masses meet in several fronts of high productivity. Whereas the Norwegian Sea is 
ice free around the year, large parts of the Barents are covered with ice in winter time. 
Specifically adapted plankton, fish and mammals are linked to the ice, and the 
withdrawal of the ice edge during spring creates a particular dynamic with an early 
plankton bloom, providing food for ice amphipods which again provide food for pelagic 
fish, in particular capelin, and fish larvae. 
The primary production in both the Norwegian Sea and the Barents Sea is 
characterized by pronounced peaks in production during late spring and a less 
pronounced peak during autumn. The average production in the Barents has been 
estimated to 90 g C m-2 year-1
. The zooplankton community both in the Norwegian Sea 
and the Barents is dominated by three groups: Calanus finnmarchicus which is totally 
dominating both the Norwegian Sea and the Barents in terms of biomass, krill following 
second in terms of biomass and pelagic amphipods following third. C. finnmarchicus is 
essential in the diets of all the big pelagic fish populations like NSS-herring, capelin and 
mackerel (Scomber scombrus). The dominant krill species are Thysanoessa inermis, T. 
longicaudata and Meganyctiphanes norvegica. They occur in all water masses in the 
Nordic Seas and are important in diet of NSS-herring, mackerel, blue whiting 
(Micromesistius poutassou), NEA cod, haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus), redfish
(Sebastes spp.), and salmon (Salmo salar). The dominating amphipods in the Barents 
are the Themisto abyssorum and Themisto libellula. They are important in the diet of 
capelin (Mallotus villotus), but also of NEA cod in years when capelin and herring are 
scarce. In addition, they are important in the diet of polar cod, harp seal and different 
seabirds.
The benthic community in these ecosystems is poorly known, in particular in the 
Norwegian Sea. In the Barents the bentho-pelagic coupling is probably strong in some 
areas, and a time series on benthos is starting to build up showing that both temporal 
and spatial variability in the benthic communities is strong.
Among the fish there are a few dominating pelagic groups in terms of biomass: The 
population of NSS-herring constitutes a biomass of more than 10 million tons. It spawns
along the Norwegian coast, feeds in the Norwegian Sea and has its main nursery areas 
in the Barents. The blue whiting and Atlantic mackerel stocks are also seasonally highly 
abundant in the Norwegian Sea. The mackerel competes with herring for Calanus in the 

=== PDF PAGE 41 ===
41
upper pelagic whereas blue whiting has a more semipelagic distribution. In the Barents, 
the capelin plays a fundamental role. It is a major consumer of plankton and essential 
as food for NEA cod and marine mammals. The NEA cod is economically the most 
important stock, and is an important consumer of capelin and other young fish. In the 
Norwegian Sea there is a community of mesopelagic fish that play an important role in 
terms of biomass. In the Barents the polar cod is important in association with the ice, 
with a biomass estimated to 1.5 to 2 million tons. 
The most important seabird species in the Norwegian Sea In terms of abundance and 
consumption, is the Atlantic puffin (Fratercula arctica) consuming an estimated 300000 
tons of fish. Second follows the Northern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialis) consuming an 
estimated 165000 tons of which 2/3 are invertebrates. In the Barents the Brünnich’s 
guillemot (Uria lomvia) is by far the most important consuming an estimated 550000 
tons of which 50 % is estimated to be fish and the rest invertebrates. 
The most important whales in terms of biomass and consumption are the minke whales 
(Balaenoptera acutorostrata) with an estimated consumption of about 1.8 million tons. 
The main prey is krill, young herring and young cod. It is present during summer time in 
the Norwegian Sea and the Barents. Other important whales when considering 
consumption are the sperm whale and the fin whale. The most important seal in terms 
of biomass and consumption and probably the most important top predator in the 
Barents is the harp seal. It is separated into three populations with two of them feeding 
in the Barents: The Greenland Sea population with an estimated number of 600000 
±200000 adults and 100000 ±35000 pups and the White Sea population with 2 million 
±600000 adults and 360000 ±60000 pups. Only the consumption of the White Sea 
population is estimated to lie between 2.7 and 4 million tons, consisting mostly of 
amphipods, capelin, polar cod, and herring. 
The sum of fisheries in the Barents and Norwegian Sea catches a total of about 5-7 
million tons. NSS-herring dominates the catch in the Norwegian Sea with 1.5 million 
tons followed by blue whiting with 1.25 million tons and saithe with 200000 tons. In the 
Barents there has historically been a huge fishery after capelin peaking at around 3 
million tons in the late 70ies. The catch of NEA cod is at present around 430000 tons 
and of haddock around 100000 tons. 90 % of the fishery resources in Norwegian waters 
are shared with other nations. Typical is also the fact that many of the important fish 
stocks are migratory and distributed between several EEZ. All advice to management 
goes through the ICES.
Ecosystem Modelling of the Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf (NAFO Divisions 
2J3KLNO) 
Alida Bundy
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Bedford Institute of Oceanography, Canada
The Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf is located in the northwest Atlantic and extends from 
the Hudson Strait in the north (latitude 60°00') to the Grand Banks (46°00') in the south, 

=== PDF PAGE 42 ===
42
encompassing the North Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO) management divisions 
2GHJ3KLNO (Figure 1). Sea-ice begins to form by December in the north and by March 
has reached its maximum spread south to the northern Grand Bank (Prinsenberg et al., 
1997). In the southern regions, ice usually lasts from 1-2 months whereas at the northern 
end of the Labrador Shelf it lasts for an average of around 8 months. There are strong 
annual cycles in the water mass properties due to seasonal variations in atmospheric 
forcing, while decadal changes are linked to the NAO which can account for between 40-
50% of the variance in sea-ice, ocean temperatures and shelf stratification off Labrador 
and Newfoundland. There are many shallow offshore banks separated by a series of 
channels and gullies and the circulation pattern over the shelf is dominated by the 
southward flowing Labrador Current (for further details of the oceanography of the 
Newfoundland-Labrador shelf, see the Appendix to the ESSAS Science Plan1
). 
A defining species of the Newfoundland-Labrador shelf, from a fisheries perspective, is 
Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua), which was exploited for over 500 years before it collapsed 
in the early 1990s in NAFO Divisions 2J3KL and 3NO. A moratorium on cod was 
imposed in 1992, and other than a recreational fishery, a stewardship fishery, and a 
food fishery, there has been no legally directed fishing for cod since then. The collapse 
of cod was accompanied by other ecosystem changes, such as the colder water 
temperatures and large increases in the abundance of harp seals (Phocus 
groenlandica), snow crab (Chionoecetes opilio) and shrimp (Pandalus borealis). The 
non-recovery cod on the Newfoundland-Labrador shelf and in eastern Canada has, in 
general, been the subject of much enquiry.
The Newfoundland–Labrador fishery was modeled for the period 1985–1987 in North 
Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO) Div. 2J3KLNO to a depth of 1000 m (Bundy et 
al. 2000) using the mass balance model Ecopath with Ecosim (Christensen et al. 2005). 
An analysis of the relative roles of fishing and predation indicated that harp seal 
predation and cod predation accounted for a greater part of the total mortality on all fish 
groups than the fishery. However, for mature fish of species such as cod, American 
plaice, and Greenland halibut, the effects of fishing mortality were much greater than 
predation mortality. These results indicate that fishing mortality was a major determinant 
in the population dynamics of some of these commercial species. 
Model results indicate that the main energy pathway in the ecosystem is through 
phytoplankton – small zooplankton – large zooplankton – capelin – cod – harp seals. 
Keystone species in the system were identified as cetaceans, capelin, harp seals and 
hooded seals, using the method of Libralato et al. (2006). Keystone species are species 
which have a strong role in the structure and function of ecosystems, despite having a 
relatively low biomass and low food intake (Power et al., 1996). These species are 
comparable to keystone species in other Canadian northwest Atlantic ecosystems 
(Bundy et al, in press). For more details about input data and results see Bundy et al. 
2001, Bundy 2001 and Bundy et al, in press.
 1 http://web.pml.ac.uk/globec/structure/regional/essas/essas_appendix_web.pdf

=== PDF PAGE 43 ===
43
Figure 1. NAFO convention area. Blue line represents the Ecopath model area (NAFO 
Divisions 2J3KLNO), taken from http://sattrax.ca/marine/map_nafo.html
References
Bundy, A., J.J. Heymans, L. Morissette and C. Savenkoff. Seals, cod, and forage fish: a 
comparative exploration of variations in the theme of stock collapse and 
ecosystem change in four northwest Atlantic ecosystems. Progress in 
Oceanography. In Press. 2009.
Bundy, A., G. Lilly and P. Shelton. 2000. A mass balance model of the Newfoundland￾Labrador shelf. Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 2310, 117pp + App.
Christensen, V., C.J. Walters and D. Pauly. 2005. Ecopath with Ecosim: A user’s guide. 
WWW Page, 
http://www.ecopath.org/modules/Support/Helpfile/EweUserGuide51.pdf
55
70
40

=== PDF PAGE 44 ===
44
Libralato, S., V. Christensen and D. Pauly. 2006. A method for identifying keystone 
species in food web models. Ecological Modeling 195: 153-171
Power, M.E., D. Tilman, J.A. Estes, B.A. Menge, W.J. Bond, L.S. Mills, G. Daily, J.C.
Castilla, J. Lubchenco and R.T. Paine. 1996. Challenges in the quest for 
keystones. Bioscience, 46, 609-620.
Prinsenberg, S.J., I.K. Peterson, S. Narayanan and J.U. Umoh. 1997. Interaction 
between atmosphere, ice cover, and ocean off Labrador and Newfoundland from 
1962 to 1992. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences 54 
(Supplement 1): 30-39.
The Icelandic EEZ: background information of relevance for ecosystem 
comparison. 
Olafur S. Astthorsson
Marine Research Institute, Reykjavik, Iceland
The Mid-Atlantic or Reykjanes ridge and the Greenland-Iceland-Scotland ridges 
influence the ocean ciculation and distribution of water masses and thus also biological 
production around Iceland. The GIS ridge is of particular importance as it separates the 
flow between the warm water of the North Atlantic and cold Arctic deep water of the 
Iceland and Norwegian Seas. The Icelandic shelf is narrowest of the south coast while 
off the west and north coast it is much broader. Most of the commercially exploited fish 
stocks spawn in the Atlantic water off the south and west coasts while nursing grounds 
are off the north-west, north and north-east coasts. The Icelandic EEZ covers an area of 
758 thousand km2 while only about 220 thousand km2 is over the self and where depth 
is less than 500 m. 
To the south and west of Iceland relatively warm Atlantic is brought to the coast by the 
Irminger Current or the North Atlantic Irminger Current as it reaches the northwestern 
self of Iceland. From north along the east coast of Greenland flows the Polar East 
Greenland Current and the Arctic/Sub-Arctic East Icelandic Current flows 
southeastwards off the northeast Icelandic shelf. On the north and eastern shelves the 
Arctic/Sub-Arctic watermass is formed by mixing and local modifications of the water 
transported by the main currents. Close to the coast there is low saline Coastal Current 
formed from Atlantic/Sub-Arctic water diluted by fresh water from land.
Monitoring of temperture and salinity of Icelandic waters demonstrates four main 
periods or regimes north of Iceland during past 100 years or so. Prior to 1965 there was 
a warm period which started around 1920, 1965-1971 was a cold period with polar 
influence over the whole north Icelandic shelf area, between 1972-1997 warm and cold 
years alternated and from around 1998 until present warm years have prevailed.
Most of the sea ice that reaches Iceland originates from the Arctic Ocean and is 
transported with currents southwards along the east coast of Greenland. Southwesterly 

=== PDF PAGE 45 ===
45
winds reduce the southwards flow and direct the ice eastwards on to the northwest and 
north Icelandic shelf. Records of sea ice incidences reflect the hydrographic climate 
periods mentioned above.
Winter concentrations of main nutrients (nitrate, phosphate and silicate) are higher in 
the Atlantic water than in the Arctic water. Partly this relates to greater winter mixing in 
the Atlantic water. The seasonal cycle of nutrients is similar to that observed in other 
cold temparate waters. Nutrient depletion starts along with spring growth in April-May, 
nutrients are low in surface layers during summer and increase again with autumn 
mixing in September-November.
Primary production is higher over the shelves than farther out. Over the shelf the 
production is also higher in the Atlantic water to the south and west than in the mixed 
Atlantic/Sub-Arctic waters to the north and east. Further, in the waters to the north 
productivity is higher in water where salinity is >34.5 – that is water where Atlantic 
influence is pronounced – compared to water where salinity is <34.5 - water influenced 
by Arctic Water. High primary production is also observed in frontal zones to SE and 
NW due to increased mixing. Main phytoplankton genera/species are the following.
Spring: Diatoms, Thalassiosira, Chaetoceros, while in the spring bloom north of Iceland
a Prymnesiophyte (Phaeocyctis pouchetti) may also be important. Summer: 
Dinoflagellates (Ceratium, Protoperidinium). Autumn: Diatoms (Thalassiosira, 
Chaetoceros) and Dinoflagellates (Ceratium, Protoperidinium).
Zooplankton investigations in spring shown that Copepods dominate by abundance, 
usually ~60-80% to the south and ~20-80% to the north. C. finmarchicus is usually by 
far the most common zooplankton species. Euphausiids are clearly an important 
component of the plankton community but valid information on abundance and biomass 
is limited. Long term observations on zooplankton biomass show that it is generally 
higher in the Atlantic water to the south than in the Sub-Arctic water to the north. Highs 
and lows in biomass have been found to alternate at 6-11 year intervals. To the north of 
Iceland the variations in biomass are related to variations in temperature (or distribution 
of water masses). When tempertures are high the zooplankton biomass tends aslo to be 
higher.
Information on the benthic invertebrate communities in Icelandic waters is limited except 
for the exploited species. Five species (shrimp (offshore/inshore), scallop, lobster, 
quahog, and, to a lesser extent, whelk) constitute the invertebrate fishery. During past 
10 years, the invertebrate fisheries have decreased from about 45 thousand tonnes to 
about 8 thousand tonnes. Mainly this is due to decline in the offshore shrimp fishery but 
also most of the other fisheries except for lobster have decreased. Partly, this decrease 
has been attributed to environmental changes.
In recent years the total catch from the main demersal species (cod, haddock, and 
saithe) has been fairly stable and in fact some increase has occurred for haddock and 
saithe. Similarly for the main pelagic species, Icelandic herring, Atlanto-Scandian 
herring and blue whiting the catch has been fairly stalble, while the capelin catch has 

=== PDF PAGE 46 ===
46
decreased markedly or from about 1 million tonnes at the turn of the century to about to 
about 300 thousand tonnes during most recent years. The changes that have taken 
place with regard to the capelin stock have partly been connected to recent warming in 
Icelandic waters. Instead of being mainly distributed on the Icelandic shelf and in the 
Iceland Sea the stock has shifted farther north- and westward into Greenland waters. 
Co-occurring with the warming in Icelandic waters since 1998 marked changes in 
distribution and abundance of many other species have also been observed.
There are 23 species of seabirds in the Icelandic bird fauna and the estimated breeding 
populations are ca. 7 million pairs. Assuming immature birds to be about 40% of the 
breeding populations then the total seabird populations are ca. 20 million birds. By far 
the largest seabird population is Atlantic puffin with 2-3 million breeding pairs, and then 
northern fulmar and common guillimot with more than 1 million.
Whales are an important component of the Icelandic marine ecosystem with about 18 
species occupying the waters regularly. Most of the whales are migratory species that 
stay in Icelandic waters during summer for feeding. Minke whale is by far the largest 
baleen stock (about 60 thousand individuals), while the stocks of fin and sei whales are 
also quite large (10 thousand each). Of the toothed whales the long finned pilot whale is 
most abundant (58 thousand), followed by northern bottlenose and white-sided dolphin 
(both at around 40 thousand). Seals (gray and harbour) are not an important component 
of the system Icelandic shelf ecosystem. Harp and hooded seals are found in large 
quantities in Northern waters but limited information on stocks in the Iceland Sea.
A very preliminary Ecopath model for Icelandic waters was constituted. In several
cases basic parameters had to be adjusted in order not to get an Ecotrophic efficiency 
>1. Further in some cases data on stock sizes and catch did not cover the same period 
which may lead to an error in cases where there have been marked changes in 
biomass. The biomass and PB ratios for Calanus and krill seem low in the model. More 
groups should be feeding on these groups but consumption on these species had to 
adjusted (kept low) otherwise Ecotrophic efficiency would be greater than 1. Several 
other parameters of the model need also to be looked into further before the model can 
be used in comparative studies.
The Icelandic fishery is managed through an ITQ system that covers most of the 
commercial fisheries has been under development for several years. Thus individual 
vessel quotas represent shares in the total allowable catch and quotas are permanent 
and fairly freely transferable. TAC is reccommened by the Marine Research Institue but 
allocated by Ministry of Fisheries.
The major natural and anthropogenic drivers in the Icelandic ecosystem are considered 
to be the flow of Atlantic water influences production and distribution/abundance of 
stocks at most trophic levels. In addition, the stock status of capelin influences the 
condition of most other stocks and too heavy fishing on capelin may inpact stock size 
and therefore food availability in total system. Finally whales are important predators 
that must be considered as part of the whole system.

=== PDF PAGE 47 ===
47
Towards modeling trophic interactions in the ecosystem off West Greenland
Astrid Jarre1
, Kai Wieland2
1 Marine Research Institute, University of Cape Town
2 National Institute of Aquatic Resources, Technical University of Denmark
The West Greenland shelf between 59°30’N and 72°00’ N at a depth down to 600 m is
relatively narrow in particular in the south and consist of several banks with depths of 
less than 150 m separated by deep troughs and gullies. It is influenced by subsurface 
heat transport from the Atlantic in the Irminger current which keeps the shelf waters ice￾free up to about 65° N even in severe winters. This also leads to a distinct latitudinal 
gradient in temperature with almost boreal condition in the south. To contrast boreal and 
Sub-Arctic food webs, Ecopath models were constructed for the region south of 62° N 
and for a region between 66 and 69° N excluding fjord and inshore areas in both cases. 
34 living groups were considered and the analysis focused on forage fish/shellfish and 
their predators in the period 1995 to 2002. However, due to some severe uncertainties 
e.g. concerning the plankton dynamics and the diet of Greenland halibut and seals as 
well as with respect to abundance estimates for several functional groups the results so 
far can only be regarded as preliminary. The obtained models regrettably are not 
suitable as a basis for simulations or comparison with other ecosystems. Nonetheless 
some sub-system specifics can be inferred. Total production in the Sub-Arctic region 
was dominated by Northern shrimp (Pandalus borealis) followed by polar cod 
(Boreogadus saida) and cephalapods whereas capelin (Mallotus villosus) and sand eels 
(Ammodytes sp.) were most important in the southern region. Seals and Greenland 
halibut were the most prominent predators in the north. In contrast, predation on forage 
groups was attributed to more than 75 % to seals alone in the southern region. Atlantic 
cod did not play any role because this species had disappeared from the system in both 
regions since the collapse of the stock in the late 1980s.
Air temperature as well as surface layer temperature and in particular bottom 
temperature increased considerably in the mid 1990s. In contrast to previous warm 
periods, this was not accompanied by a recovery of the Atlantic cod stock so far 
suggesting that once the ecosystem structured has severely been altered a return to the 
previous state may not be possible, at least not in a short term. Along with the warming 
biomass of Northern shrimp and Greenland halibut on the shelf increased in the late 
1990s. In this period, Northern shrimp moved gradually northward and the spatial 
overlap between Greenland halibut and Northern shrimp increased. Indications were 
found that predation by Greenland halibut on recruits of Northern shrimp have 
contributed to a drastic decline of the shrimp stock in the most recent years. 
References
Hovgård, H. and K. Wieland. 2008. Fishery and environmental aspects relevant for the 
emergence and decline of Atlantic cod (Gadus morhua) in West Greenland waters. 
In: G.H. Kruse, K. Drinkwater, J.N. Lanelli, J.S. Link, D.L. Stram, V. Wespestad, & 

=== PDF PAGE 48 ===
48
D. Woody (eds.), Resilience of gadid stocks to fishing and climate change. Alaska 
Sea Grant, University of Alaska Fairbanks, p. 89-110.
Jarre, A., K. Wieland, R.P. Frandsen, B. Lyberth and M. Storr-Paulsen. 2005.
Exploration of ecosystem indicators for use in management of a new fishery for 
capelin off West Greenland. GLOBEC Symposium on ´Climate variability and Sub￾Arctic Marine Ecosystems´ Victoria 16 – 20 May 2005, PosterFBM7.
Wieland, K., M. Storr-Paulsen and K. Sünksen. 2007. Response in stock size and 
recruitment of Northern shrimp (Pandalus borealis) to changes in predator biomass 
and distribution in West Greenland waters. J. Northw. Atl. Fish. Sci. 39: 21-33.
ECOPATH model of the Western North Pacific (Oyashio – Transition –
Kuroshio Region)
Mitsuyo Mori1
, Hikaru Watanabe2
, Takashi Hakamada1
, Tsutomu Tamura1
, Kenji 
Konishi1
, Hiroto Murase1 and Koji Matsuoka1
1 The Institute of Cetacean Research
2 National Research Institute of Far Seas Fisheries 
Our objective of building an Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) model in the western North 
Pacific region is to evaluate the potential impact of whales migrating to the western 
North Pacific off Japan on Japan’s fisheries resources. From 1994 to 1999, a survey 
called JARPN (Japanese whale research program under special permit in the western 
North Pacific) has been carried out mainly in this region, and from 2000 to 2007, the 
second phase of this survey (called JARPN II) has been carried out. The survey has 
collected information on whale abundance, prey preferences, diet composition, rates of
consumption for predator and prey, and oceanography. Based mainly on these 
collected data, we are currently building an EwE model. Here, we focus on briefly 
introducing physical and biological backgrounds of such Ecopath model. 
The modeled area is east of northern Honshu Island, north of 35ºN, and west of 170ºE, 
south of Hokkaido (excluding Russia’s EEZ), which corresponds to sub-areas 7,8 and 9 
for the North Pacific IWC minke whale management area. The area covers part of the 
Oyashio and Kuroshio region and the transition zone between the two currents. Several 
environmental factors are thought to affect the distribution and dynamics of the species 
in the modeled area. One is the southern limit of the Oyashio current. The southern 
limit of Oyashio varies by season and year. When the southern limit is towards the 
north side, suitable fishing area of Pacific saury becomes near shore, and when the 
southern limit is towards the southern side, suitable fishing area of pacific saucy
becomes offshore, and often when it is too south, poor harvesting of fisheries is 
expected. Another important factor to consider is the pattern of the pathway of the 
Kuroshio Current. The pathway of Kuroshio varies by year and there are mainly three 
pathways.

=== PDF PAGE 49 ===
49
There are some other environmental factors that are thought to affect the dynamics of 
the species considered in the model. In the western North Pacific, ‘fish species 
alteration’ has been observed. The abundant species has altered from sardine to 
anchovy to mackerel then again to sardine then anchovy. Both biomass and catch of 
sardine drastically declined in the end of 1980s. Possible environmental factors that 
affect this phenomenon are thought to be, for example, strength of the ALPI (Aleutian 
Low Pressure Index) and the PDO (pacific decadal oscillation). When the strength of 
ALPI is weak, it is thought that the condition is not suitable for sardine, and when the 
strength of ALPI is strong, it is though that it brings good condition for sardine. Also, 
surface water temperature of the Kuroshio Extension area may be affecting the 
dynamics of the species in this area. When the surface water temperature of the 
Kuroshio Extension is low, it is thought to bring good condition for sardine, and when 
the surface water temperature of the Kuroshio Extension is high, it is thought to bring 
poor condition for sardines. However, the detailed mechanism of fish species alteration 
in the western North Pacific is not yet well known, and is currently under investigation. 
The Ecopath model consists of 31 species (or groups) and the modeled year is around 
2006-2007. As for primary producers, phytoplankton is considered. As for zooplankton, 
we considered three groups; one is euphausiids, another is ‘copepods eaten by whales’
and the other is ‘other copepods’. Major euphausiid species in the area are Euphausia 
pacifica, Thysanoessa inspinata, and Nyctyphanes difficillis. As for ’copepods eaten by 
whales’, we considered mainly three species which are Neocalanus cristatus, N. 
plumchrus, and N. flemingeri. Biomass of these species is estimated from net-sampling 
and echo-sounder data obtained from JARPNII. As for fish and squids, we considered 
11 fish species and four squid species or groups, totaling 15 species/groups. Among 
the 15 species/groups considered, six species are at high biomass level (which are 
albacore, skipjack tuna, blue shark, spotted chub mackerel, anchovy and Pacific saury), 
two species are at middle biomass level (which are sword fish, large surface squid), and 
three species are at low level (which are neon-flying squid, chub mackerel and sardine). 
As for the trend of biomass, most of the species are stable in recent years, except that 
biomass of blue shark and chub mackerel is increasing currently, and biomass of 
spotted chub-mackerel and anchovy is slightly decreasing. Among these species, 
lanternfish has the largest biomass. Neon-flying squid, mackerel, sardine, anchovy and 
pacific saucy are important Japanese fish resources. Among these five fish/squid 
species, catch and biomass of sardine drastically decreased from the end of 1980s to 
the 1990s and currently is at very low level. Also, catch and biomass of mackerel also 
decreased at the end of 1970s. For other species such as pacific saucy, neon-flying 
squid and anchovy, no obvious trend in catch and biomass can be seen for the past 40 
years. Total catch of Pacific saury is the highest among these five species resulting in 
approximately 2 million tons/year, followed by that of anchovy of 1.5 million tons then 
mackerel of about 1.2 million tons. Total catch of sardine and neon-flying squid is 
about 450 thousand tons/year. 
As for marine mammals, since we are focusing on these species and its interactions, 
groups are classified in quite details and we considered nine whale species or groups, 

=== PDF PAGE 50 ===
50
and one fur seals. Whale species considered included: minke; Bryde’s; sei; sperm;
Baird’s beaked; and short-finned pilot whale. We also considered other baleen whales, 
ziphiidae, and other toothed whales. Among the marine mammals, sperm whale has 
the largest biomass. Biomass estimates, Q/B and diet composition data are mainly 
obtained from JARPNII. 
As for trophic interactions, from JARPNII, we found that minke whales mainly feed on 
Pacific saury and anchovy, Bryde’s whales and sei whales also mainly feed on anchovy. 
The diet of sperm whales was different from other species and they feed mainly on mid￾deep water sea squid. When relative consumption on Pacific saury and anchovy by 
predators is compared, consumption by mackerel and whales is relatively high; the
largest predation on anchovy (mature component) is by whales; followed by skipjack 
tuna, mackerel, and neon-flying squid. Thus, whales seems to be important predators 
for Pacific saury and anchovy, and this is the reason why we are focusing our research 
on this point which is the impact of whale’s consumption on Japan’s fisheries resources. 
As for fisheries and management systems, catches of mackerel, sardine and Pacific 
saury are controlled by TAC system in Japan. Current stock assessment indicates that 
F of chub-mackerel and sardine, especially F on the immature component, needs to be 
reduced below the current level. For other species, no major limit on catch is set. For 
baleen whales, management procedure was agreed by IWC. But it has not been 
implemented yet in this area.
Finally, as for major natural drivers or critical factors that cause ecosystem change in a 
several decadal scale, possible environmental factors are strength of ALPI, PDO, 
surface water temperature of the Kuroshio Extension area, and for yearly or monthly 
change, southern limit of Oyashio or pattern of the pathway of Kuroshio affects 
distribution of fishes, and also to some extent, we believe that predator-prey interactions 
and fisheries are affecting the dynamics of the species.
Projected Changes in the Physical Environment of Four Sub-Arctic Seas under 
Climate Change
W. Paul Budgell1, 2, 3
, Enrique Curchitser4 and Vidar S. Lien1, 2
1
Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, Norway
2
Bjerknes Centre for Climate Research, Bergen, Norway
3
Department of Physics and Physical Oceanography, Memorial University of 
Newfoundland, St. John's, NL, Canada
4
Institute of Marine and Coastal Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, NJ, USA
Results from the Fourth Assessment Report (AR4) of the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) were downscaled to examine projected changes in ocean and 
ice conditions in four Sub-Arctic Seas under climate change. The GISS AOM (NASA 
Goddard Institute for Space Studies Atmosphere-Ocean Model) results were 
downscaled using the coupled ice-ocean Regional Ocean Modeling System (ROMS) for 

=== PDF PAGE 51 ===
51
two scenarios: the climate of the twentieth century (20C3M) and potential future 
conditions with CO2 stabilized at 720 ppm (SRES A1B). Conditions during the period 
1985-2000 in the 20C3M scenario are contrasted with those during the period 2051-
2065 in the SRES A1B scenario for four Sub-Arctic Seas: the Barents, Nordic, Labrador 
and Bering Seas.
The responses to projected climate change of the Barents and Bering Seas are similar 
and the response of the Nordic Seas is similar to that of the Labrador Sea. The 
strongest responses are those of the Barents and Bering Seas, with substantial 
warming and winter ice reduction in the eastern Barents and north-eastern Bering. The 
responses of the Nordic and Labrador Seas are relatively weak. There is a projected 
slight cooling on the continental shelves of Iceland and south-eastern Greenland due to 
a reduced Atlantic inflow to the Nordic Seas. Warming in the Labrador Sea is restricted 
to the continental shelf break and (in summer) to western Baffin Bay.

=== PDF PAGE 52 ===
52
Appendix 4: Terms of Reference ESSAS WG-1
Terms of Reference
ESSAS Working Group 1: Regional Climate Prediction (WGRCP)
28 February 2007
Introduction
A major goal of ESSAS is to predict the potential impacts of climate variability on the 
sustainable use of the Sub-Arctic Seas. ESSAS has elected to employ a comparative 
approach, investigating in each of the Sub-Arctic Seas which energy pathways appear 
particularly vulnerable to decadal and longer-term climate change. The ecosystem 
response to climate can be non-linear with thresholds, have complex interactions 
between species, and different species impacts from similar climate fluctuations.
Reducing uncertainty about the future states of ESSAS ecosystems depends on 
knowledge of the response of the ecosystem to changes in climate and a quantitative 
ability to project future climate states. The first task represents understanding and 
modeling the complex linkages between climate variables and species distributions and 
is a primary focus of the other two ESSAS Working Groups (ESSAS Working Group 2: 
Biophysical Coupling Mechanisms and ESSAS Working Group 3: Modeling Ecosystem 
Responses).
A Goal of the Working Group on Regional Climate Prediction (WGRCP) is to provide 
quantitative estimates of the magnitude and uncertainty of future climate change for the 
ESSAS regions, and the frequency distribution of natural variability, such as the well 
known ecosystem reorganization of the North Pacific in the mid-1970s and historical 
interdecadal variability in the marginal seas of the North Atlantic. Climate elements 
known to be crucial to ESSAS ecosystems include sea ice cover, ocean temperature, 
circulation, and stratification.
A major resource for the development of future climate scenarios is the recently 
available results from 22 state-of-the art coupled atmosphere-ocean climate models 
which are part of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) Fourth 
Assessment Report (AR4). A preliminary investigation has shown that a subset of 
these models represents the physical forcing in several ESSAS ecosystems reasonably 
well based on comparison with in situ data for the late 20th century. There are several 
factors that lead to the perceived credibility of future climate scenarios from climate 
models, including the differences between models, validation exercises for different 
physical variables, and matching the spatial scales that are important to ecosystem 
biology.
Tasks
1. Evaluate the credibility of the 22 IPCC models as applied to each of the different 
ESSAS regions based on comparison of 20th century hindcasts with data, and model 

=== PDF PAGE 53 ===
53
to model consistency and physical reliability in their forecasts. Produce a report which 
provides recommendations on which models perform well for each region.
2. Working within the larger ESSAS framework, establish which seasons, regions and 
variables are most important to potential ecosystem shifts and provide report on 
future scenarios and confidence estimates of these conditions for different future time 
horizons. Assess the contributions from intrinsic climate variability and external 
anthropogenic forcing.
3. Recommend IPCC models and procedures for downscaling of the model output for 
use in regional ocean/ecosystem models.
4. Be a community resource on retrospective and future climate change issues.
Implementation
1. The Working Group on Prediction shall exist for a period of three years, ending six 
months after the 2009 annual meeting of ESSAS.
2. Six to eight members will be chosen from the fields of climate science and numerical 
modeling. Input from experts on ecosystem processes will be sought through 
collaboration with ESSAS WG 2 and 3.
3. The development of the proposed products includes conducting workshops held at 
the annual ESSAS meetings and will require inter-sessional work. The purpose of 
the workshops is to vett and reach consensus on information made available prior to 
the workshops from the published IPCC Reports and from direct model evaluations 
provided by members.
Expected Results
To ensure the perceived credibility of future regional climate scenarios, we will develop 
a white paper after the ESSAS Workshop in 2007 that examines the differences 
between IPCC models, identifies the spatial scales and variables that are of relevance 
to ecosystem-effects of climate change, and delineates further validation exercises for 
different physical variables that have been performed. 
After the ESSAS Workshop in 2008, we plan to have a set of climate predictions for the 
major ESSAS ecosystems, based on the IPCC climate models. These regional climate 
scenarios will have sufficient credibility that they can be used by other ESSAS Working 
Groups as the basis for their ecosystem modeling efforts.
Initial Membership
James Overland Acting Chair, USA Lennart Bengtsson Germany
Paul Budgell Norway Vladimir Kattsov Russia
Ken Drinkwater Norway Mike Foreman Canada 
Hisashi Nakamura Japan John Walsh USA 

=== PDF PAGE 54 ===
54
Appendix 5: Terms of Reference ESSAS WG-2
Terms of Reference
ESSAS Working Group 2: Bio-Physical Coupling (WGBPC)
28 February 2007
Introduction
A major goal of ESSAS is to predict the potential impacts of climate variability on the 
sustainable use of the Sub-Arctic Seas. ESSAS has elected to employ a comparative 
approach, investigating, in each of the Sub-Arctic Seas, which energy pathways appear 
particularly vulnerable to decadal and longer-term climate change. The ecosystem 
response to climate can be non-linear with thresholds, have complex interactions 
between species, and feature different species responses to similar climate fluctuations 
in different ecosystems. Reducing uncertainty about the future states of ESSAS 
ecosystems depends on developing the ability to project future climate states as well as 
predicting the response of the ecosystem to changes in climate. Predicting future 
climate states is the primary focus of ESSAS Working Group I on Regional Climate 
Prediction. This requires quantitative estimates of the magnitude and uncertainty of 
future climate change for the ESSAS regions, and the frequency distribution of natural 
variability, such as the well-known ecosystem reorganization of the North Pacific in the 
mid-1970s and historical inter-decadal variability in the marginal seas of the North 
Atlantic. Predicting ecosystem response requires both understanding and modeling the 
complex linkages between climate variables and species distributions. This represents 
the primary focus of two ESSAS Working Groups (ESSAS Working Group 2: 
Biophysical Coupling Mechanisms and ESSAS Working Group 3: Modeling Ecosystem 
Responses).
A Goal of the Working Group on Bio-Physical Coupling (WGBPC) is to determine how 
climate-driven variability in physical conditions and processes in the ocean will affect the 
organisms that make up marine ecosystems and thus the transfer of energy and 
material through Sub-Arctic marine ecosystems. Physical aspects of the ocean thought 
to be crucial to ESSAS ecosystems include sea ice cover, ocean temperature, 
circulation, and stratification.
A great deal is already known about the responses of organisms to physical variability in 
the ocean, but the literature is scattered and there is need to summarize what is known 
specifically about the responses of populations and the ecosystem as a whole in the 
Sub-Arctic Seas and how information gathered in one basin may be applied to ocean 
regions elsewhere in the Sub-Arctic. Thus a major task for the WGBPC will be to
provide the modelers in the ESSAS WGMER with realistic values for parameterizing 
predictive models of ecosystem response to climate variability.

=== PDF PAGE 55 ===
55
Tasks
1. Summarize and evaluate the available information on the responses of marine 
organisms of the Sub-Arctic Seas from phytoplankton to marine mammals and 
seabirds to variability in physical attributes of the ocean such as seasonal sea ice 
cover, ocean temperature, stratification, and circulation. 
2. Working within the larger ESSAS framework, provide the WGMER with a realistic set 
of values with which to model organism responses to climate-driven variability in the 
physical attributes of the Sub-Arctic Seas.
3. Be a community resource on retrospective and future climate change issues.
Implementation
1. The Working Group on Bio-Physical Coupling shall exist for an initial period of three 
years, ending six months after the 2009 annual meeting of ESSAS. At this time, the 
ESSAS SSC will evaluate whether the WG should continue, be revised slightly or 
dissolved.
2. Eight to ten members will be chosen from the fields of biological and fisheries 
oceanography. Input from experts on future climate variability and the needs of 
ecosystem modelers will be sought through collaboration with ESSAS WG 1 and 3, 
respectively.
3. The development of the proposed products includes conducting workshops held at 
the annual ESSAS meetings and will require inter-sessional work. The purpose of 
the workshops is to review information on how changes in various physical attributes 
of the ocean will affect important ecosystem components. Foci of workshops will 
include the roles of: seasonal sea ice cover, temperature, stratification and 
circulation.
Expected Results
Workshop products will be one or more review papers based on comparative studies, to 
be published in the refereed literature, that summarize the important mechanisms 
whereby the changes in the physical attribute under discussion affect biological 
constituents of Sub-Arctic ecosystems and their inter-relationships. Where possible, 
these papers should provide the information necessary for parameterizing the 
biophysical coupling parameters in ecosystem models of the Sub-Arctic Seas. Where 
sufficient data are lacking to accomplish this task, there should be a clear statement 
concerning the lack of specific data that could guide fieldwork during ESSAS.
Initial Membership
George Hunt USA, Acting Chair Earl Dawe Canada
Elena Dulepova Russia Erica Head Canada
Franz Mueter USA Emma Orlova Russia
Vladimir Ozhigin Russia Vladimir Radchenko Russia
Marit Reigstad Norway Sei-ichi Saitoh Japan
Egil Sakshaug Norway Yasunori Sakurai Japan
Paul Wassermann Norway Kai Wieland Denmark

=== PDF PAGE 56 ===
56
Appendix 6: Terms of Reference ESSAS WG-3
Terms of Reference
ESSAS Working Group 3: Modeling Ecosystem Response (WGMER)
28 February 2007
Introduction
A major goal of ESSAS is to predict the potential impacts of climate variability on the 
sustainable use of the Sub-Arctic Seas. ESSAS has elected to employ a comparative 
approach, investigating in each of the Sub-Arctic Seas which energy pathways appear 
particularly vulnerable to decadal and longer-term climate change. Ecosystem-level 
response to climate can vary spatially, geographically, and ontogentically. It can 
manifest itself locally (i.e., be non-linear with threshold responses), involve complex 
species-to-species interactions (i.e. ecosystem reorganization in response to climate 
change, and/or demonstrate different within-species responses between different 
regional geographic locations within the same ocean basin, all originating from similar 
climate fluctuations. 
Reducing uncertainty about the future states of ESSAS ecosystems depends on 
knowledge of the response of the ecosystem to changes in climate and a quantitative
ability to project future climate states. The first ESSAS goal of prediction requires a 
fundamental understanding of climate-biological interactions. With understanding comes 
the ability to model the complex linkages between climate variables and species 
distributions, which are the primary focus of the other two ESSAS Working Groups 
(ESSAS Working Group 1: Regional Climate Prediction and ESSAS Working Group 2: 
Biophysical Coupling Mechanisms).
The goal of the Working Group on Modeling Ecosystem Response (WGMER) is to
develop conceptual, mechanistic/process, statistical/empirical, and simulation models to 
facilitate comparison of ESSAS ecosystems and to forecast the impacts of climate 
change on ecosystem structure and function in multiple ESSAS ecosystems.
Much data has already been collected in ESSAS ecosystems. Thus a major task of 
WGMER will be to inventory these data and evaluate the suitability of using these data 
in comparative analysis, modeling and forecasting climate impacts. 
Tasks
Identify modeling methodologies that will facilitate comparison of the biological, 
physical, and trophodynamic aspects of the ESSAS ecosystems across regions. Identify 
and suggest suitable conceptual, mechanistic/process, statistical/empirical, and 
simulation models to examine for potential application. 
1. Assemble existing biophysical datasets and time series from ESSAS ecosystems to 
facilitate joint comparative studies. 

=== PDF PAGE 57 ===
57
2. Apply the identified candidate models and modeling techniques to ESSAS 
ecosystems and ecosystem data sets to describe and validate the models.
3. Evaluate ESSAS modeling proposals and offer recommendations to the SSC.
Implementation
1. The Working Group on Modeling Ecosystem response shall exist for a period of 
three years, ending six months after the 2009 annual meeting of ESSAS.
2. Six to eight members will be chosen from the fields of quantitative ecology and 
fisheries oceanography. Input from experts on future climate variability and 
ecosystem process will be sought through collaboration with ESSAS WG 1 
and 2, respectively.
3. The development of the proposed products will include conducting workshops held 
at the annual ESSAS meetings and also inter-sessional workshops as required. 
The purpose of the workshops will be to review candidate modeling methodology, to 
facilitate ecosystem comparisons, and the identification of suitable data sets. Inter￾sessional work will involve pre-workshop preparation, data analysis, model 
coding, model application post-workshop report preparation, and the preparation of 
peer-reviewed manuscripts.
Expected Results
Workshop products will be one or more review papers, to be published in the refereed 
literature, that summarize the important ecosystem features that facilitate comparison. 
Other products will include short position reports on the models evaluated, strategies for 
implementing the models, recommendations on future data collection and on synthesis 
of existing data, and methodological recommendations for ensuring appropriate among 
and between ecosystem comparisons. Joint efforts on these and other specific topics 
will be done in collaboration with the WG 1 and WG 2.
Initial Membership
Bernard A. Megrey USA, Co-Chair Shin-ichi Ito Japan, Co-Chair
Kenneth Rose USA, Co-Chair Paul Budgell Norway
Lorenzo Ciannelli USA Masahiko Fujii Japan
Gennady Kantakov Russia Franz Mueter USA

=== PDF PAGE 58 ===
58
Appendix 7: Terms of Reference ESSAS WG-4
Terms of Reference
ESSAS Working Group 4: Gadoid-Crustacean Interactions (WGGCI)
Ecosystem Studies of Sub-Arctic Seas (ESSAS)
25 March 2008
Introduction
A major goal of ESSAS is to predict the potential impacts of climate variability on the 
sustainable use of the Sub-Arctic Seas. ESSAS has elected to employ a comparative 
approach to investigate, in each of the Sub-Arctic Seas, which energy pathways appear 
particularly vulnerable to decadal and longer-term climate change. The ecosystem 
response to climate change can be non-linear with thresholds, have complex 
interactions between species, and feature different species responses to similar climate 
fluctuations in different ecosystems. Reducing uncertainty about the future states of 
ESSAS ecosystems depends on developing the ability to project future climate states as 
well as predicting the response of the ecosystem to changes in climate. Predicting 
future climate states is the primary focus of ESSAS Working Group I on Regional 
Climate Prediction. Understanding and modeling the complex linkages between 
observed and projected climate variability and species distributions is the primary focus 
of two ESSAS Working Groups (ESSAS Working Group 2: Biophysical Coupling 
Mechanisms and ESSAS Working Group 3: Modeling Ecosystem Responses). 
Goals
The main goal of Working Group 4 on Gadoid-Crustacean Interactions (WGGCI) is to 
assess the effects of ocean climate variation and fishing on the interactions between 
gadoid fishes and crustaceans by conducting a comparative study across multiple Sub￾Arctic marine ecosystems. 
Approach
Gadoid fish and crustaceans are important components of the benthic food web in most 
Sub-Arctic ecosystems and are often among the most important commercial fisheries in 
these systems. Much is already known about the responses of gadoid fish and 
crustaceans to physical variability in the ocean. However, there is a need to summarize 
what is known specifically about the responses of these populations in Sub-Arctic Seas 
to climate variability in the context of fishery takes and to contrast and compare these 
responses among different ecosystems. This working group deliberately focuses on a 
small set of interacting species to identify consistent associations between the major, 
commercially important, gadoid fish and crustacean species in each system and to 
evaluate their responses to observed climate variability. Identifying associations will 
improve our understanding of ocean climate effects or ‘bottom-up’ processes that are 
important in regulating these populations. Our working hypothesis is that gadoid fish 

=== PDF PAGE 59 ===
59
and crustaceans respond in opposite ways to ocean climate variation and that such 
variation results in differences in productivity and abundance between gadoids and 
crustaceans. 
The physical aspects of the ocean that may be crucial in regulating these responses in 
the ESSAS ecosystems include sea ice cover, ocean temperature, circulation, and 
stratification. Our approach is consistent with the ESSAS approach of making 
comparisons across multiple ecosystems. It is recognized that population responses 
may not be consistent across all Sub-Arctic ecosystems, but similarities and differences 
will help identify ecosystem features that are related to the functional mechanisms 
governing gadoid – crustacean interactions and dynamics. These mechanisms may 
operate at the adult stages (e.g. through predation or variations in reproductive 
success), during early life history stages (e.g. through effects on survival of larval or 
early benthic/demersal stages) and/or at lower trophic levels (variations in food 
availability). This study is intended to complement other studies of effects of ocean 
climate on productivity at low trophic levels (e.g. BSIERP/BEST in the Bering Sea, 
ESSAS Working Group on Biophysical Coupling) to elucidate how bottom-up processes 
function in regulating ecosystem structure.
To achieve its goals the working group will engage experts from as many Sub-Arctic 
ecosystems as possible to obtain the best available datasets on variability in abundance 
of gadoids and crustaceans, as well as relevant ocean climate indices and fisheries 
takes from each system. Data analyses will be conducted within and across ecosystems 
to identify important associations and to examine similarities and differences among 
ecosystems. Results from these analyses should lead to a better understanding of the 
functional relationships between gadoid and crustacean populations and between 
climate variability and these populations.
Tasks
1. Summarize and evaluate the available information on the responses of gadoid fish 
and crustaceans in the Sub-Arctic Seas to variability in physical attributes of the 
ocean (such as seasonal sea ice cover, ocean temperature, stratification, and 
circulation). This includes: compilation of relevant literature, and compilation of 
relevant datasets. For each ecosystem, these datasets should include: annual 
estimates of abundance or biomass of important gadoid and crustacean populations; 
annual estimates of recruitment to these populations where available; total annual 
harvests from these populations; and ocean climate indices thought to be relevant to 
the populations by local experts.
2. Conduct statistical analyses of relevant data sets from each ecosystem, including:
correlation analyses; multivariate analyses of within and between-system patterns of 
variability; and models of species interactions
3. Serve as a resource to other working groups within ESSAS, to the larger ESSAS 
community, and to other researchers on retrospective and future climate change 
issues in regards to gadoid and crustacean resources.

=== PDF PAGE 60 ===
60
Implementation
The Working Group on Gadoid-Crustacean Interactions shall exist for an initial period of 
three years, ending six months after the 2011 annual meeting of ESSAS. At that time, 
the ESSAS Scientific Steering Committee will evaluate whether the WG should continue 
as is, continue under revised terms of reference, or be dissolved.
Twelve to fourteen members will be chosen from the fields of gadoid and crustacean 
biology, as well as physical, biological and fisheries oceanography. Input from experts 
on future climate variability, bio-physical coupling, and the needs of ecosystem 
modelers will be sought through collaboration with ESSAS WG 1, 2, and 3, respectively.
Development of the proposed products includes: 
• Conducting a workshop to be held at one of the annual ESSAS meetings. The 
purpose of the workshop will be to review information on how changes in climate will 
affect gadoid and crustacean populations
• Literature searches and data compilation with help from local experts in each of the 
regions; a student will be recruited to assist with these tasks (funds for a M.S. student 
for 2 years have been secured)
• Conducting data analyses (student, with help from working group members)
• Preparing presentations for workshops, preparing manuscripts
• Conducting e-meetings as necessary to review progress and coordinate tasks
Expected Results
We anticipate one or more comparative papers based on a review of the literature and 
new data analyses to summarize important associations between climate variability and 
the relative productivity of gadoid and crustacean populations in Sub-Arctic ecosystems. 
Where possible, the paper(s) should provide the information necessary for 
parameterizing relevant relationships between gadoid and crustacean populations in 
ecosystem models of the Sub-Arctic Seas. Where sufficient data are lacking to 
accomplish this task, there should be a clear statement concerning the lack of specific 
data that could guide future fieldwork.
Initial Membership
Boris Berenboim Russia 
Ann Dorte Burmeister West Greenland
Earl Dawe Canada (Co-chair)
Franz Mueter USA (Co-chair)
Vladimir Ozhigin Russia
Yasunori Sakurai Japan
Shareef Siddeek USA 
Don Stansbury Canada
Jan Sundet Norway
Dan Urban USA
Jie Zheng USA

=== PDF PAGE 61 ===
61
Regions of study (tentative):
Barents Sea
East Greenland / Iceland
West Greenland
Labrador/Newfoundland
Eastern Bering Sea
Gulf of Alaska
Oyashio Current region

=== PDF PAGE 62 ===
62
Appendix 8: 
ICED – Integrating Climate and Ecosytem Dynamics
A program overview by Rachel Cavanagh1
, ICED Program Officer
Interim Steering Committee led by Eugene Murphy1 and Eileen Hofmann2
1
British Antarctic Survey, 2
Old Dominion University
Results from the past two decades of Southern Ocean research clearly demonstrate 
that integrated multidisciplinary approaches are required to improve understanding of 
the circumpolar ecosystem and the response of this system to variability and change. 
This is key to predicting impacts of climate and harvesting, improving sustainable 
management, and elucidating the role of the Southern Ocean in the Earth System. 
However, ecosystem modeling for the region is in its early stages and tends to be 
restricted in geographic and/or trophic scope. Integration of relevant data resources, 
field efforts, and experimental studies is vital to improving models. Circumpolar data 
collation and rationalization are required to identify gaps in coverage and knowledge, 
and to address these through coordination of international fieldwork. 
Acknowledging these challenges the recently adopted Integrating Climate and 
Ecosystem Dynamics in the Southern Ocean program (ICED) will cross traditional 
disciplinary boundaries to integrate research on ecosystems, biogeochemistry and 
climate at the circumpolar scale. The ICED Science Plan and Implementation Strategy 
has recently been approved and is about to be published. This document serves as a 
framework to guide the ICED program in generating circumpolar datasets, undertaking 
coordinated field activities, and developing integrated models to determine the process 
interactions underlying Southern Ocean ecosystem variability and change. ICED will run 
for a decade under the joint guidance of IMBER and GLOBEC. 
It is becoming increasingly apparent that links need to be strengthened between those 
working in Antarctic and Arctic regions. Some of the strongest regional expressions of 
global climate change have occurred in the Polar Regions and are predicted to 
continue. Comparative views of marine ecosystem operation in both Polar Regions are 
essential to determine the responses to climate change and potential feedback effects. 
ICED aims to build firm links with ESSAS, particularly to conduct comparative analyses 
and develop models of polar marine ecosystems. 
For more information see http://www.iced.ac.uk