PDF PAGE 1
Class ACTINOPTERYGII
Order ELOPIFORMES
ELOPIDAE
Tenpounders (ladyfishes)
by D.G. Smith
A single species occurring in the area.
Elops hawaiiensis Regan, 1909
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: Elops australis Regan, 1909 / Elops saurus Linnaeus, 1766.
FAO names: En - Hawaiian ladyfish.
Diagnostic characters: Body elongate, fusiform, moderately compressed. Eye
large. Mouth large, gape ending behind posterior margin of eye; mouth terminal,
jaws approximately equal; a gular plate present between arms of lower jaw.
Teeth small and granular. Branchiostegal rays numerous, approximately 20
to 25. All fins without spines; dorsal fin begins slightly behind midbody; anal fin
short, with approximately 14 to 17 rays, begins well behind base of dorsal fin;
caudal fin deeply forked; pectoral fins low on side of body, near ventral outline;
pelvic fins abdominal, below origin of dorsal fin.
Scales very small, approxi-
mately 100 in lateral line. Colour: blue or greenish grey above, silvery on sides;
fins sometimes with a faint yellow tinge.
Similar families occurring in the area
Clupeidae: lateral line absent; gular plate absent; most species have scutes along midline of belly.
Megalopidae (Megalops cyprinoides): scales much larger, about 30 to 40 in lateral line; last ray of dorsal
fin elongate and filamentous.
gular
plate
branchiostegal
rays
ventral view of head
no lateral line
scutes
Clupeidae
filament
Megalopidae (Megalops cyprinoides)
Elopiformes: Elopidae
1619
click for previous page

PDF PAGE 2
Albulidae (Albula spp.): mouth inferior.
Chanidae (Chanos chanos): mouth smaller, gape not extending behind eye; gular plate absent; bran-
chiostegal rays fewer, approximately 4 or 5.
Size: Maximum standard length slightly less than 1 m, commonly to 50 cm; seldom reaches a weight of
5 kg (= “ten pounds”), despite the family’s common name.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: A coastal fish, commonly entering lagoons, bays, and estuaries. An
active swimmer, commonly travelling in schools in open water; feeds on various fishes and crustaceans.
Little detailed knowledge exists of its biology. Like Megalops, Albula, and the eels, it has a leptocephalus
larva. Spawning takes place offshore and young larvae are found in the open sea. As the larvae develop,
they move toward shore, and juveniles are commonly found in salt marshes, canals, and tidal streams.
Caught throughout the area, mainly with seines, gill nets, and handlines; separate statistics not available;
marketed fresh or frozen; in some places ground up as fish meal. A good sport fish on light tackle, striking
a variety of artificial lures as
well as live shrimp or baitfish.
Distribution: Found through-
out the area.
Remarks: Currently treated
as a single species, but this
status should be considered
provisional.
Further studies
may reveal a complex of
closely related species, as in
the case of Albula.
References
Regan, C.T. 1909.
A revision of the fishes of the genus Elops. Ann. Mag. nat. Hist., (8)3:37-40.
Whitehead, P.J.P. 1962. The species of Elops (Pisces: Elopidae). Ann. Mag. nat. Hist., (13)5:323-329.
mouth inferior
Albulidae (Albula spp.)
mouth smaller
Chanidae (Chanos chanos)
1620
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 3
MEGALOPIDAE
Tarpons
by D.G. Smith
A single species occurring in the area.
Megalops cyprinoides (Brussonet, 1782)
TAI
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Indo-Pacific tarpon; Fr - Tarpon indo-pacifique; Sp - Tarpón indo-pacífico.
Diagnostic characters: Body moderately deep, compressed, deepest in middle,
tapering toward both ends.
Eye large.
Mouth large, gape ending at level of
posterior margin of eye; lower jaw projects beyond snout; a gular plate
present between arms of lower jaw. Teeth small, granular. Branchiostegal
rays numerous, 26 or 27. Gill rakers long and slender. Fins without spines; dorsal
fin at midbody, directly over pelvic fins, last ray elongate and filamentous;
pectoral fins low on side of body near ventral margin; pelvic fins abdominal; anal
fin begins behind dorsal fin; caudal fin deeply forked. Scales large, about 40 to
50 in lateral line. Colour: bluish green above, silvery on sides.
Similar species occurring in the area
Albulidae (Albula spp.): mouth inferior; last dorsal-fin ray not elongate and filamentous; scales smaller.
Clupeidae: lateral line absent; gular plate absent; most species have scutes on midline of belly.
gular
plate
branchiostegal
rays
ventral view of head
mouth inferior
Albulidae (Albula spp.)
no lateral line
scutes
Clupeidae
Elopiformes: Megalopidae
1621

PDF PAGE 4
Elopidae (Elops spp.): scales much smaller, about 100 on lateral line; last dorsal-fin ray not elongate and
filamentous.
Chanos chanos: mouth smaller, gape not reaching beyond anterior part of eye; scales smaller; last
dorsal-fin ray not elongate and filamentous; gular plate absent; fewer branchiostegal rays (4).
Size: Maximum total length 55 cm, commonly to 30 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Primarily a coastal fish, commonly entering lagoons and estuaries; an
active swimmer, living in open water. Tarpon have a leptocephalus larva, similar to that of Elop s, Albula,
and the eels. They spawn offshore and young larvae are found in the open sea. Juveniles move inshore
and often occur in tidal streams and marshes. Juveniles and adults can tolerate a wide variety of salinities.
Their modified swimbladder permits them to breathe air and thus survive in oxygen-poor water. Tarpons
are predaceous, feeding mainly on fishes and crustaceans. Caught by gill nets, seines, and trawls, and
by hook-and-line; marketed fresh and dried salted. From 1990 to 1995, FAO’s Yearbook of Fishery
Statistics reports a range of yearly production of 280 to 1 100 t of Megalops cyprinoides from the Western
Central Pacific (Malaysia,
Philippines). This is a good
sport fish, although it does not
grow nearly as large as the
Atlantic tarpon.
Distribution: Widely distrib-
uted in the tropical Indo-West
Pacific from East Africa and
the
Red
Sea
eastward
through most of the western
Central Pacific to the Society
Islands and Australia.
Reference
Wade, R.A.
1962.
The biology of the tarpon, Megalops atlanticus, and the ox-eye, Megalops cyprinoides, with
emphasis on larval development. Bull. Mar. Sci. Gulf and Caribb., 12(4):545-622.
Elopidae (Elops spp.)
mouth smaller
Chanidae (Chanos chanos)
1622
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 5
Order ALBULIFORMES
ALBULIDAE
Bonefishes
by D.G. Smith and J.E. Randall
D
iagnostic characters: Body moderately elongate, fusiform, slightly compressed. Eye large. Snout
conical, projecting well beyond lower jaw. Mouth small, inferior, gape not reaching anterior margin
of eye; a small gular plate present between arms of lower jaw, but small and inconspicuous. Teeth small,
granular, in patches on jaws and on roof and floor of mouth. Branchiostegal rays about 10 to 15. Gill
rakers rudimentary, consisting of small patches of minute, villiform teeth. All fins without spines; dorsal
fin located at about midbody, with about 16 or 17 rays; anal fin with 7 to 9 rays, located well behind dorsal
fin; caudal fin deeply forked; pectoral fins low on side of body, near ventral outline; pelvic fins abdominal,
located under posterior part of dorsal fin. Scales small, about 60 to 80 along lateral line. Colour: bluish
green dorsally, often with several faint saddles of slightly darker colour; silvery on sides, with several faint,
narrow, longitudinal lines; belly white.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries:
Bonefish occur primarily in shallow, coastal waters on sand or mud
bottoms, in areas of relatively high salinity.
They are bottom feeders, rooting in the substratum for
crustaceans and various other small invertebrates and fishes; when feeding in very shallow water, the
caudal fin may protrude from the water, a habit known as “tailing”.
They are active fishes, generally
travelling in small groups and covering large areas while foraging. Like Elops, Megalops, and the eels,
bonefish have a compressed, transparent leptocephalus larva. They spawn offshore and the young larvae
are found in the open sea. The bonefish is a renowned sport fish, famous for its long, powerful runs. In
clear, shallow water bonefish are extremely wary and difficult to approach, a quality that enhances their
challenge to anglers. While they can easily be caught on live shrimp or crabs, most anglers prefer to use
various artificial lures, including flies. Their flesh is of excellent quality, but the numerous small bones
make them as much of a challenge to eat as to catch. They are caught locally, mainly with gill nets or
occasionally cast nets; no separate statistics available; marketed fresh.
Remarks: The Albulidae contains 2 main groups of species, which at various times have been recognized
as genera or subgenera. Albula (Dixonina) nemoptera lives in somewhat deeper water and is confined to
the western Atlantic and eastern Pacific. The Albula (Albula) vulpes group lives in shallower water and
is found in all tropical seas. It was formerly believed that Albula vulpes is a single cosmopolitan species.
Recent work has shown that this “species” is actually a complex of several similar but genetically distinct
species. Two species are known from the Western Central Pacific. They are nearly identical in external
appearance and can be distinguished only with difficulty. Both species occur throughout the area.
Similar families occurring in the area
Elopidae (Elops spp.): mouth terminal.
Megalopidae (Megalops spp.): mouth supraterminal, lower jaw projecting; last dorsal-fin ray elongate and
filamentous; scales larger.
ventral view
of head
gular
plate
Elopidae
filament
Megalopidae
Albuliformes: Albulidae
1623

PDF PAGE 6
Clupeidae: lateral line absent; gular plate absent;
most species have scutes along midline of body.
Chanidae (Chanos chanos): gular plate absent;
fewer branchiostegal rays (4 or 5).
Sillaginidae: 2 dorsal fins, first with IX to XII spines;
anal fin with long base, consisting of II spines and
15 to 27 soft rays.
Key to the species of Albulidae occurring in the area
1a.
Upper jaw (tip of snout to posterior end of maxilla) shorter, 3.05 to 3.25 times in head
length; tip of lower jaw broadly rounded (Fig. 1a); a spot of black pigment often present
on underside of snout, at least in smaller individuals; tooth patches on parasphenoid
and basibranchial bones more broadly oval in shape, average width/length 0.38 and
0.45, respectively (Fig. 2a); number of teeth in second pharyngobranchial tooth patch
usually 5 to 15 (Fig. 2a) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Albula glossodonta
1b. Upper jaw longer, 2.65 to 2.85 times in head length;
tip of lower jaw angular, with a pointed symphysis
(Fig. 1b); no black pigment on ventral surface of
snout; tooth patches on parasphenoid and basi-
branchial bones more elongate, average
width/length 0.28 and 0.34 respectively (Fig. 2b);
number of teeth in second pharyngobranchial tooth
patch usually 15 to 30 (Fig. 2b)
. . . . . . . . . Albula forsteri
List of species occurring in the area
Albula forsteri Valenciennes, 1847 (formerly known as Albula neoguinaica)
Albula glossodonta (Forsskål, 1775)
References
Alexander, E.C. 1961.
A contribution to the life history, biology and geographic distribution of the bonefish, Albula
vulpes (Linnaeus). Dana Rept., (53):51 p.
Shaklee, J. B. and C. S. Tamaru. 1981. Biochemical and morphological evolution of Hawaiian bonefishes (Albula). Syst.
Zool., 30(2):125-146.
no lateral line
scutes
Clupeidae
mouth smaller
Chanidae
II spines
spines
Sillaginidae
parasphenoid
tooth patch
roof of
mouth
2nd
pharyngo-
branchial
tooth
patch
floor of
mouth
basibranchial
tooth patch
a) Albula
glossodonta
b) Albula
forsteri
Fig. 2
tip of lower
jaw rounded
snout
angular
b) Albula forsteri
a) Albula glossodonta
Fig. 1 ventral view of head
1624
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 7
HALOSAURIDAE
Halosaurs
by D.G. Smith
D
iagnostic characters: Body elongate; tail slender and attenuate, frequently broken and regener-
ated; anus slightly before midlength. Head elongate, its length contained approximately 3 times in
preanal length. Eye well developed. Snout prolonged, extending well in front of mouth, tip rounded or
pointed, often depressed. Anterior and posterior nostrils close together, in front of eye. Mouth inferior,
overhung by snout, moderate in size, gape ending approximately under or slightly before front of eye.
Teeth small, granular, in patches on jaws and palatopterygoid. Dorsal fin short-based, on midtrunk,
slightly closer to anus than to tip of snout, all rays segmented (anteriormost ray reduced and unsegmented
in Aldrovandia); anal fin long, extending from just behind anus to tip of tail; pectoral fins well
developed, on side of body at or above lateral midline; pelvic fins present, located abdominally, under or
slightly in front of dorsal fin; caudal fin absent.
Scales relatively large, overlapping, covering body in
well-defined horizontal and vertically oblique rows; scales of lateral line enlarged; head partially scaled.
Lateral line well developed, canals large and cavernous on head and body; lateral line runs along lower
side of body, near ventral outline in lateral view. Colour: variable, ranging from black to light grey or tan;
sides of body and opercle often silvery in fresh specimens; no bars, stripes, spots or other distinct markings;
inside of mouth and pharyngeal cavity sometimes black.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Halosaurs live on or near the bottom in moderate to deep water, usually
between about 500 and 3 000 m. They are bottom feeders, preying mainly on crustaceans and other small
invertebrates. Males develop markedly enlarged olfactory organs at maturity, suggesting that they locate
their mates through pheromones. Like eels and elopiforms, halosaurs have a pelagic, leptocephalous
larva.
Although they are occasionally taken in deep bottom trawls, halosaurs have no commercial
importance.
Similar families occurring in the area
Macrouridae: anterior dorsal fin directly above pectoral fins; a long, low second dorsal fin extending to
end of tail; pelvic fins directly under pectoral fins.
Ateleopodidae: dorsal fin above pectoral fins; pelvic fins under or ahead of pectoral fins; snout short and
bulbous; scales very small or absent.
dorsal fin
short-based
mouth
inferior
attenuate tail
(after Goode and Bean, 1896)
anal fin
long
dorsal-fin
origin
pelvic fin
long 2nd dorsal fin
Macrouridae
dorsal-fin origin
pelvic fin
Ateleopodidae
Albuliformes: Halosauridae
1625

PDF PAGE 8
Notacanthidae:
dorsal fin consists of a series of
separated spines, not connected by a membrane.
Lipogenyidae:
dorsal fin with 4 to 6 unsegmented
spinous rays; mouth sucker-like.
Key to the genera of Halosauridae
Remarks on key characters: trawled specimens often lose their scales; scale pockets remain, however,
and these are usually sufficient to indicate where scales have been.
1a.
Top of head scaled at least as far forward as level of nostrils (Fig. 1a); lateral-line scales
slightly enlarged, 1 such scale for each transverse row of body scales (Fig. 1b) . . . . . Halosaurus
1b. Top of head naked (Fig. 2a); lateral-line scales markedly enlarged, 1 such scale for
each 2 or 3 transverse rows of body scales (Fig. 2b) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . →2
2a.
First dorsal-fin ray segmented, as long as second ray; scales present on opercular bone
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Halosauropsis
(so far, known only from Atlantic, South Africa, and New Zealand)
2b. First dorsal-fin ray reduced to a short, unsegmented spine, much shorter than second
dorsal-fin ray; scales absent on opercular bone (although they may be present just
dorsal to the bone) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Aldrovandia
List of species occurring in the area
Aldrovandia affinis (Günther, 1877)
Aldrovandia mediorostris (Günther, 1887)
Aldrovandia phalacra (Vaillant, 1888)
Halosaurus ridgwayi (Fowler, 1934)
References
Goode, G.B. and T.H. Bean. 1896. Oceanic Ichthyology. Spec. Bull. U.S. Natn. Mus., 553 p.
McDowell, S. 1973. Family Halosauridae. In Fishes of the Western North Atlantic, Part 6, edited by D.M. Cohen. Mem.
Sears Found. Mar. Res., 1(6):32-123.
separated dorsal-fin spines
Notacanthidae
spinous rays in dorsal fin
sucker-like mouth
Lipogenyidae
b) side of body
a) anterior part of body (dorsal view)
top of head scaled
lateral-line scales
Fig. 1 Halosaurus
a) anterior part of body (dorsal view)
top of head naked
b) side of body
lateral-line scales
Fig. 2 Aldrovandia
1626
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 9
NOTACANTHIDAE
Spiny eels
by D.G. Smith
D
iagnostic characters: Body moderate to moderately elongate; tail slender and tapering to a point,
often broken and regenerated; anus somewhat before midlength.
Head moderately deep to
moderately elongate, somewhat compressed, its length contained 2 to 3 times in preanal length. Eye well
developed. Snout projects beyond mouth, tapering to a rounded tip. Anterior and posterior nostrils close
together, in front of eye. Mouth relatively small, inferior, overhung by snout, gape ending in front of or
under eye; maxilla without teeth, nearly excluded from gape by premaxilla. Teeth small, pointed, in
a single row on premaxilla, in 1 to several rows on palatine and dentary. Dorsal fin consists of a series
of unsegmented spines, isolated from each other and not connected by a membrane, its length
variable, beginning on head or trunk and extending behind anus, but ending well before end of tail; anal
fin long, extending from just behind anus to tip of tail, anterior rays spinous; pectoral fins well
developed, located on midside, a short but distinct distance behind gill opening; pelvic fins abdominal,
slightly in front of anus; caudal fin absent. Scales small and overlapping, covering most of head and body.
Lateral line complete, on dorsal half of body anteriorly, becoming midlateral on tail; canals and scales not
notably enlarged. Colour: light grey to dark brown; lining of mouth and branchial chamber black; no distinct
markings or patterns.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Spiny eels (or notacanthids) live on the bottom at depths of approximately
200 to 3 500 m.
They feed on various small invertebrates, including crustaceans, echinoderms, poly-
chaetes, bryozoans, and hydrozoans. Their olfactory organs are well developed and are undoubtedly used
in finding food.
Spiny eels show little sexual dimorphism, although the males tend to be smaller than
females and have a larger olfactory organ. The larva is a leptocephalus, similar to that of the halosaurs,
eels, and elopiforms. Spiny eels are occasionally taken in deep bottom trawls, but they have no commercial
value.
Similar families in the area occurring in the area
Spiny eels are unlikely to be confused with any other fishes. The peculiar spinous dorsal fin, without
connecting membranes, the slender, tapering tail, and the long anal fin distinguish them from all other
families in the area.
Halosauridae: dorsal fin short, with soft rays connected by membrane.
Lipogenyidae: dorsal fin with both spines and segmented soft rays, connected by a membrane and forming
a single, short-based fin.
mouth small,
inferior
isolated dorsal-fin spines
(after Goode and Bean, 1896)
anal fin long
short dorsal fin with segmented
rays and membrane
Halosauridae
short dorsal fin with segmented
rays and membrane
Lipogenyidae
Albuliformes: Notacanthidae
1627

PDF PAGE 10
Key to the genera of Notacanthidae
1a.
Dorsal-fin spines XXVI to XL; body and head more slender (Fig. 1) . . . . . . . . Polyacanthonotus
1b. Dorsal-fin spines VI to XV; body and head stouter (Fig. 2)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Notacanthus
List of species occurring in the area
Note: a single species, Notacanthus abbotti, has actually been recorded from the area. Others are known
from Japan and New Zealand and may possibly extend into the area in very deep water. The following list
includes those species known from the western and Central Pacific.
Notacanthus abbotti Fowler, 1934
? Notacanthus chemnitzi Bloch, 1788
? Notacanthus sexspinis Richardson, 1846
? Polyacanthonotus challengeri (Vaillant, 1888)
References
Goode, G.B. and T.H. Bean. 1896. Oceanic Ichthyology. Spec. Bull. U.S. Natn. Mus., 553 p.
McDowell, S. 1973. Family Notacanthidae. In Fishes of the Western North Atlantic, Part 6, edited by D.M. Cohen. Mem.
Sears Found. Mar. Res., 1(6):124-207.
Sulak, K.J., R.E. Crabtree, and J.-C. Hureau. 1988.
Provisional review of the genus Polyacanthonotus (Pisces:
Notacanthidae) with description of a new Atlantic species, Polyacanthonotus merretti. Cybium, 8(4):57-68.
body more slender
XXVI-XL dorsal-fin spines
Fig. 1 Polyacanthonotus
body stouter
VI-XV dorsal-fin spines
Fig. 2 Notacanthus
1628
Bony Fishes

PDF PAGE 11
LIPOGENYIDAE
Spiny sucker eels
by D.G. Smith
A single species in this family.
Lipogenys gilli Goode and Bean, 1896
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Spiny sucker eel.
Distinctive characters: Body moderately elongate; tail slender and tapering to a point. Head narrow,
somewhat compressed, tapering anteriorly to a rounded point as seen from above, more broadly rounded as
seen from side.
Eye well developed. Snout projects beyond mouth. Anterior and posterior nostrils close
together, about halfway between eye and tip of snout. Mouth inferior, small and sucker-like; upper lip with
thick, pleated folds; posterior end of maxilla bent sharply downward, forming a flap-like structure; fleshy
papillae on snout bordering upper lip. Teeth absent. Dorsal fin short based, located above anus, the first
4 to 6 rays hard and spinous, increasing in length from front to back, the remainder soft and segmented,
membrane connecting all rays except first 1 to 3 spines. Anal fin long, extending from just behind anus
to tip of tail, anterior rays spinous, posterior rays segmented, the transition gradual. Pectoral fins slightly
below midside, behind gill opening; pelvic fins abdominal;caudal fin absent. Scales small, covering most of head
and body. Lateral line complete, on dorsal half of body anteriorly, becoming midlateral on tail; canals and scales
not notably enlarged. Colour: light brown or grey; lining of gill chamber dark brown; no markings or patterns.
Similar species occurring in the area
Halosauridae: mouth normal, not sucker-like; dorsal fin with-
out spines or with a single, short spine connected to remainder
of fin by membrane.
Notacanthidae: mouth normal, not sucker-like; dorsal fin with-
out segmented rays, instead, a series of isolated spines
unconnected by a membrane.
Size: Maximum total length about 50 cm.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: This species lives on the
bottom in approximately 600 to 2 000 m and seems to feed
mostly on organic material contained in bottom sediment
drawn up by the sucker-like mouth. Little is known about its
biology; there is no obvious sexual dimorphism. Lipogenys
gilli is primarly an inhabitant of colder water and is currently
known from the western North Atlantic, Japan, and New Zealand. It is included here on the chance that it
might extend into the area in deep water. L. gilli is rarely seen and has no commercial value.
Remarks: Although Lipogenys is usually placed in its own family, primarily because of the peculiar and
highly modified mouth, its anatomy is similar in most respects to that of the Notacanthidae. Indeed, a
recent study placed Lipogenys as the sister group of Polyacanthonotus within the Notacanthidae.
Reference
McDowell, S. 1973. Family Lipogenyidae. In Fishes of the Western North Atlantic, Part 6, edited by D.M. Cohen. Mem.
Sears Found. Mar. Res., 1(6):208-228.
mouth inferior,
sucker-like
(after Goode and Bean, 1896)
dorsal fin short based
anal fin long
anterior part of body (ventral view)
dorsal fin without spines
normal mouth
Halosauridae
isolated dorsal spines
normal mouth
Notacanthidae
Albuliformes: Lipogenyidae
1629
click for next page
