S. Guénette, 2013 Bay of Bengal model 22 
 
especially, in region 3 where they were systematically lower per unit area of shelf that in other regions. Thus 
biomasses were often modified to provide enough prey to predators and balance the model.  
 
In all regions, consumption on carangids was too high, mainly because of biases in SM pisc diet composition in 
addition to over predation from coastal scombrids and tuna-like groups. The biomass of carangids was increased in 
all regions and especially in region 3 where the initial biomass was estimated at 0.35 t/km 2; and needed to be 
increased 10-fold (Table 16). Also, the problematic diets were modified (Table 17). In region 1, some of the 
problems with carangids were caused by a large biomass of Lpisc as estimated by Ecopath. To decrease the 
biomass, L pisc cannibalism was decreased and its importance in the diet of other fish (e.g. SM pisc, carangids) was 
decreased.   
 
The biomass of benthic invertebrates was increased in all regions to accommodate predation pressure, and P/B 
was increased for SM inv in all regions. Cephalopods are a largely unknown  component although they are an 
important predator in the system. To maintain their biomass at lower levels and reduce pressure on fish, 
cephalopod cannibalism was reduced. Finally, hilsa biomass was increased from 1.75 to 2.4 t/km
2 and that of 
Indian mackerel from 0.43 to 1.9 t/km2.  
 
Finally, after balancing, some groups seem to be not very well modelled. For instance, the group 1L  pisc comm 
with its large biomass has an estimated EE of 0.4 which can indicate bias in diet or overestimate of their biomass or 
P/B. The same can be said for S bathy as a large portion of their production is unexplained by the model. The 
biomass of oceanic shark does not seem to be too low resulting in an EE of 0.58, meaning that the mortality 
unexplained by the model is very high. In contrast, EE is very high for coastal elasmobranch, which is caused in part 
by the relatively high catch relative to biomass input in the model.  
 
A word of caution: It is important to remember that the current Ecopath model is one image of the ecosystem 
given the data available and choices made for each parameter at the input stage and the modifications made to 
balance the model. Changing the assumptions would change biomasses and P/B values and possibly the strength 
of the foodweb links.  
  