We used the isoscape model provided by St John Glew et al.
(2021), where a δ15N baseline was modelled in R-INLA (inte-
grated nested Laplace approximation) for the Southern Ocean,
originally based on POM measurements to calculate trophic levels
(TL). Baseline values were extracted from their first interaction
model for each season and location of our samples and applied
to our analysis according to the following equation:
TLconsumer = [(d15Nconsumer −d15Nprimary consumer)/3.4] + 1
(2)
where 1 represents trophic level 1 of POM, and trophic levels were
calculated for each sample. The isoscape model was subdivided
into seasons: Jan–Feb, Mar–Apr, May–Oct and Nov–Dec, so we
assigned our samples accordingly. To estimate a broad relation-
ship between measured δ15N and calculated trophic levels for
visualisation purposes, a simple linear model was performed
TL = b0 + b1 × d15N
(3)
using all δ15N values measured, regardless of the species.
Ecopath
The Ecopath model was built using the freeware ‘Ecopath with
Ecosim’ software tool, v. 6.6.5 (Pauly, 2000). The mass-balanced
approach of Ecopath is based on two equations. The first equation
(where P is production):
P = catch + predation + net migration + biomass accumulation
+ other mortality
(4)
describes the potential fate of total production of each functional
group. The second equation (where Q is consumption):
Q = P + respiration + unassimilated food
(4b)
uses the principle of conservation of matter within each group.
Ecopath relies on parameters to define the energy budget of
each compartment, and at least three of them must be entered.
The four parameters are the biomass (B), production/biomass
(P/B; also referred to as total mortality = Z), consumption/
biomass (Q/B) ratios, and the ecotrophic efficiency (EE). The eco-
trophic efficiency expresses the proportion of the production used
in the system (Christensen et al., 2008).
The model presented here refers to the area of the Falkland
shelf up to a depth of 300 m, which covers about 200,000 km2;
it considers species and functional groups that can be found
within the shelf area over the year, including migratory species.
Adults of D. eleginoides, certain skate species and certain gren-
adier species were excluded from the model, as they can only be
found in depths greater than 300 m. For D. gahi, autumn (ASC)
and spring (SSC) spawning cohorts were modelled separately, to
enable more precise estimates of their trophic niche and relation-
ships within the ecosystem. The fisheries fleet include jiggers and
trawlers; longliners were excluded from the model for the same
reason as adult D. eleginoides was excluded.
Production (P/B) as well as total mortality (Z) and consump-
tion (Q/B) rates were mostly obtained from FishBase (Froese and
Pauly, 2021), with the annual water temperature adapted to 7°C.
Biomass values for major fish groups were obtained from stock
assessment models from the FIFD for 2020. For groups not of
commercial interest to the Falkland Islands Fisheries but for
which catch data and CPUE data from 2020 were available, a
Schaefer production model (BSM) was applied (Froese et al.,
2017). For invertebrate species and other functional groups
where P/B and Q/B values could not be obtained by FishBase,
values of similar functional groups were averaged from other
studies (Table 2). Total mortality Z, P/B and Q/B were also calcu-
lated and cross validated with the following equations provided by
Figure 2. Detailed map of Falkland Islands Conservation Zone sampling area and ‘Loligo box’; dashed lines show Falkland Inner Conservation Zone (FICZ);
Doryteuthis gahi not included (see Figure 1).
6
Tobias Büring et al.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0025315423000887 Published online by Cambridge University Press
