299
Marine Fisheries Resources of the North Coast of 
Central Java, Indonesia: An Ecosystem Analysis
Subhat Nurhakim
Research Center for Capture Fisheries Agency for Marine and Fisheries Research
Jl. Pasir Putih I, Ancol Timur Jakarta
14430 Jakarta, Indonesia 
Nurhakim, S. 2003. Marine fisheries resources of the north coast of Central Java: An ecosystem 
 
analysis, p. 299 - 312. In G. Silvestre, L. Garces, I. Stobutzki, M. Ahmed, R.A. Valmonte-
 
Santos, C. Luna, L. Lachica-Aliño, P. Munro, V. Christensen and D. Pauly (eds.) Assessment,
 
Management and Future Directions for Coastal Fisheries in Asian Countries. WorldFish
 
Center Conference Proceedings 67, 1 120 p.
Abstract
A trophic model of the marine fisheries resources of the north coast of Central Java, 
Indonesia was constructed using the Ecopath with Ecosim software and data from 
a trawl survey conducted in the area in 1979. The model consists of 27 ecological 
groups with a mean trophic level of 3.04. The exploited fishery was then a  moder­
ately mature and relatively stable system. The impact of the fishery at the time was 
low to moderate in comparison with the fisheries in other systems and notably in 
later time periods.
Introduction
The Sunda shelf of Southeast Asian waters is one 
of the most extensive continental shelves in the 
world, covering some 1 850 000 km2 with most 
of the area shallower than 100 m depth. Mud, 
muddy sand, and sand are the predominant bot­
tom sediment, and several large areas were, before 
the onset of trawling, densely covered by giant cup 
sponges. Exploitation of the demersal resources has 
a long history (Butcher 1996), but the intensity of 
exploitation has not spread uniformly over the 
whole area, causing several areas to be overex-
ploited, especially on the north coast of Java (Mart-
osubroto 1996). Most fishers exploit nearshore 
areas using traditional fishing gears. However, 
trawlers began operating near the coast in the early 
1970s, soon leading to conflicts and concerns 
about the resource situation. In the 1980s, all trawl 
operations in Western Indonesia were banned, and 
most trawlers on the north coast of Java were 
converted to purse seiners. Purse seine effort then 
developed rapidly, while the demersal fishes and 
shrimps were largely left for traditional fishers to 
exploit.
Stock assessments indicate that the demersal 
resources along the north coast of Java are over-
exploited (Dwiponggo et al. 1986), implying the 
need for management. Owing to the complexity 
of the fisheries and the resources management, 
using ecosystem approaches are required. Although 
problems remain in adopting an ecosystem-based 
approach in the area, the Ecopath with Ecosim 
software which include time- and spatial-dynamic 
simulation models, may be used as a tool to study 
fisheries resources in an ecosystem context and 
for exploring management options (Christensen et 
al. 2000; Pauly et al. 2000).
Materials and Methods
Study Area and Data Sources
This study is based on the Ecopath with Ecosim 
mass-balance trophic modeling approach and 
describes the fisheries resources along the north 
coast of Central Java (Fig. 1). 
Data and information used to build the ecosystem
