1  
Please note that this is an author-produced PDF of an article accepted for publication following peer review. The definitive 
publisher-authenticated version is available on the publisher Web site.  
 
Journal of Marine Systems 
August 2017, Volume 172, Pages 104-117  
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jmarsys.2017.03.008 
http://archimer.ifremer.fr/doc/00377/48771/ 
© 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.   
Achimer 
http://archimer.ifremer.fr 
Trophic models: What do we learn about Celtic Sea and Bay 
of Biscay ecosystems? 
Moullec Fabien 1, 2, Gascuel Didier 1, *, Bentorcha Karim 1, Guénette Sylvie 3, Robert Marianne 4 
 
1 Université Bretagne Loire, Agrocampus Ouest, UMR 985 Ecology and Ecosystems Health, 65 rue de 
Saint Brieuc, CS 84215, 35042 Rennes Cedex, France  
2 IRD, UMR 248 MARBEC, Université de Montpellier, Place E. Bataillon, 34095 Montpellier Cedex, 
France  
3 EcOceans, 12 St Croix, St Andrews, NB E5B 2K5, Canada  
4 Ifremer, Unité de Sciences et Technologies halieutiques, Laboratoire de Technologie et Biologie  
Halieutique, 8 rue François Toullec, F-56325 Lorient Cedex, France 
* Corresponding author : Didier Gascuel, email address : Didier.Gascuel@agrocampus-ouest.fr  
 
Abstract : 
 
Trophic models are key tools to go beyond the single -species approaches used in stock assessments to 
adopt a more holistic view and implement the Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM). 
This study aims to: (i) analyse the trophic functioning of the Celtic Sea and the Bay of Biscay, (ii) 
investigate ecosystem changes over the 1980 –2013 period and, (iii) explore the response to 
management measures at the food web scale. Ecopath models were built for each ecosystem for years 
1980 and 2013, and Ecosi m models were fitted to time series data of biomass and catches. EcoTroph 
diagnosis showed that in both ecosystems, fishing pressure focuses on high trophic levels (TLs) and, to 
a lesser extent, on intermediate TLs. However, the interplay between local env ironmental conditions, 
species composition and ecosystem functioning could explain the different responses to fisheries 
management observed between these two contiguous ecosystems. Indeed, over the study period, the 
ecosystem's exploitation status has impr oved in the Bay of Biscay but not in the Celtic Sea. This 
improvement does not seem to be sufficient to achieve the objectives of an EAFM, as high trophic levels 
were still overexploited in 2013 and simulations conducted with Ecosim in the Bay of Biscay in dicate 
that at current fishing effort the biomass will not be rebuilt by 2030. The ecosystem's response to a 
reduction in fishing mortality depends on which trophic levels receive protection. Reducing fishing 
mortality on pelagic fish, instead of on demers al fish, appears more efficient at maximising catch and 
total biomass and at conserving both top -predator and intermediate TLs. Such advice -oriented trophic 
models should be used on a regular basis to monitor the health status of marine food webs and analy se 
the trade-offs between multiple objectives in an ecosystem-based fisheries management context. 
 
 
 
 
2  
Please note that this is an author-produced PDF of an article accepted for publication following peer review. The definitive 
publisher-authenticated version is available on the publisher Web site.  
Highlights 
► Trophic models were built to analyze the functioning of ecosystems and changes over the 1980 -2013 
period. ► EcoTroph diagnoses showed that the  ecosystem’s exploitation status has improved in the 
Bay of Biscay but not in Celtic Sea.  ► Changes in ecosystems result of the interplay between fisheries 
management and the occurrence of good recruitments.  ► Reducing fishing mortality on small pelagics 
is the most efficient scenario to maximize catch and conserve predators.  ► The fishing impact of every 
fleet on the food web was assessed using Ecosim, highlighting the large effect of trawling.  
 
Keywords : Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM ), Bay of Biscay, Celtic Sea, 
Ecopath with Ecosim, EcoTroph, Trophic indicators 
 
 
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
2 
 
 
Keywords: Ecosystem approach to fisheries management (EAFM), Bay of Biscay, Celtic Sea, Ecopath 
with Ecosim, EcoTroph, Trophic indicators 
 
1 Introduction 
Fishing activities do not only decrease the abundance of targeted species , they also affect their 
competitors, prey and predators (Olsen et al., 2004; Worm et al., 2006). The community structure 
and functioning could therefore be affected t hrough trophic relationships (Daskalov et al., 2007; 
Tremblay-Boyer et al., 2011). Moreover, in a context of global change, direct and indirect impacts of 
fishing activities are cumulative and act in synergy to increase resource instability (Cheung et al., 
2009; Pereira et al., 2010). In this context, implementing an Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries 
Management (EA FM) is an urgent necessity (FAO, 2003). EAFM aims to apply the principles of 
sustainable development to the fisheries sector and to move beyond the traditional single -species 
approaches in fisheries management (Collie and Gislason, 2001; Gascuel e t al., 2011; Walters et al., 
2005a) by accounting for  interspecific interactions, habitat quality and global change  in fisheries 
management. The ultimate goal is to maximise human welfare from an economic, social and 
environmental perspective (Garcia, 2003; Garcia and Cochrane, 2005). The necessity of this approach 
is now recognized as self-evident to all fishery scientists and stakeholders, but the main challenge lies 
in its implementation.  
From this point o f view, ecosystem modelling is an important tool for studying, evaluating and 
predicting the potential effects of fisheries on the exploited ecosystems and for exploring further the 
structure and trophic functioning of marine ecosystems (Plagányi, 2007). Am ong existing ecosystem 
models, trophic models like Ecopath with Ecosim (Christensen and Pauly, 1992; Polovina, 1984; 
Walters et al., 1997) have become widely used tools for EAFM (Christensen and Walters, 2004; Pauly 
et al., 2000). Ecopath provides a snapshot representation of the resources in the ecosystem and their 
interactions in a specific period. It is used to analyse interspecific relations and direct and indirect 
impacts of fishing activities on the whole food web (Christensen and Pauly, 1992). Ecosim is the time-
dynamic version of Ecopath and uses mass -balance results from Ecopath for parameter estimation. 
The model is fitted to observe d data and used to evaluate the relative effects of fishing, trophic 
relationships and environmental disturbances on observed dynamics (Christensen et al., 2005; 
Christensen and Walters, 2004). EcoTroph (Gascuel, 2005; Gascuel and Pauly, 2009) is a recent 
approach increasingly used for modelling aquatic ecosystems (e.g. Colléter et al., 2012; Gasche et al. , 
2013; Prato e t al., 2016 ; Valls et al., 2012). It is based on a simple representation of ecosystems 
structure using trophic spectra  that summarizes the trophic functioning as a continuous flow of 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
3 
 
biomass surging up the food web, from low to high trophic level s due to p redation and ontogeny 
processes. 
In European Union waters, as a result of the overexploitation of some major stocks, yields began to 
decrease everywhere since the mid-1970s (Gascuel et al., 2016). Intensification of fishing effort and 
extension of exploita tion to a wider part of the ecosystems were insufficient to compensate the 
decrease in abundance of exploited fish stocks and landings halved over the past 40 years  (Ibid.). In 
the late 1990s, the overall fishing pressure reached its highest values and most stocks showed an 
alarming state of depletion. In addition, ecosystem indicators suggest a degradation of the health 
status in most of the European seas. Over the past decade, the fishing pressure decreased  
significantly, mainly due to more restrictive catch quotas, but no clear recovery in total biomass and 
ecosystem indicators is yet apparent (Gascuel et al., 2016).  
The Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea , which are among the main European fishing zones in terms of 
landings, illustrate the situation described above. These ecosystems experienced a constant increase 
of fishing effort and an unprecedented increase in fishing capacity until the 1990s , reaching an 
excessive level  in fishing power (Mesnil, 2008). As a consequenc e, several studies have shown a 
significant reduction of biomass with increasing impacts on all compartments of the ecosystem (e.g. 
Gascuel et al., 2012 and 2016; Guénette and Gascuel, 2012; Pinnegar et al., 2002; Rochet et al., 
2005).  
In previous studies  dealing with trophic modelling  (Guénette and Gascuel, 2009; Bentorcha 2014; 
Bentorcha et al., 2017 ), the Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea were considered as a single ecosystem . 
However, they are considered distinct ecosystems not only in the European Mari ne Strategy 
Framework Directive  (European Commission, 2008) , but also  for the implementation of EAFM in 
European seas (STECF, 2012). Therefore, in this study, the two ecosystems were modelled separately, 
as case studies to improve ecosystem -based fisheries management in Europe . We show how these 
models can be used to (i) understand the trophic functioning of ecosystems and associated fishing -
induced changes in the food web, (ii) build global diagnoses of the ecosystem impact of fishing an d 
(iii) explore sce narios of ecosystem-based fisheries management. We compared the Bay of Biscay 
and the Celtic Sea in terms of ch anges in structure and trophic functioning. Ecopath models were 
built for 1980 and 2013 in a  scientific advice-oriented approach and using all ou tputs of  the 
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) stock assessment and survey data as input. 
Then, indicators of fishing impact s on the food web were estimated using EcoTroph. In both 
ecosystems, Ecosim models were fitted to time ser ies of biomass, abundance indices, catch and 
fishing mortalities over the 1980 -2013 period . Several fisheries management scenarios were used 
with the best fitted model, namely the Bay of Biscay  model,  examining the impact on ecosystem 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
4 
 
biomass and trophic indicators of the good environmental status of ecosystem s as defined by the 
Marine Strategy Framework Directive (MSFD; European Commission, 2008). 
 
2 Materials and Methods 
2.1 Study sites 
The two trophic models represent the continental shelves, from the coast to the 200 m isobaths,  of 
the Celtic Sea and the Bay of Biscay ecosystems ( Divisions VIIe-j and VIIIab, respectively, according to 
the classification of  ICES) (Fig. 1). These two areas are characterized by distinct oceanographic and 
ecological features and by specific fish assemblage s (Borja et al., 1998; Koutsikopoulos and Le Cann, 
1996; Pingree et al., 1981; Planque et al., 2004; Varela, 1996). T he total area is 232  360 km² for the 
“Celtic Sea” model and 83 466 km² for the “Bay of Biscay” model. 
In the Bay of Biscay, catches amounted to about 105 000 tonnes in 1980 and 150 000 tonnes in 2013. 
The main exploited specie s ( by weight) are sardine (2 1 %), hake (17 %), horse mackerel (10 %), 
anchovy (7 %) , and mackerel (6  %). The Celtic Sea is characterized by greater catches with 320 000 
tonnes reported in 1980, and 385 000 tonnes in 2013. The main targeted species are horse mackerel 
(15 %), hake (7 %), and anglerfish (6 %). Boarfish (Capros aper), one of the main by-catch, represents 
more than 15 % of total catches.  The main countries fish ing in this area are France, Spain, United 
Kingdom and, to a lesser extent, Ireland, Belgium and Germany.  
 
2.2 The Ecopath with Ecosim model 
2.2.1 Principles and equations 
Ecopath is a mass-balanced model that represents the trophic functioning and structure of an aquatic 
ecosystem (Christensen and Pauly, 1992; Christensen and Walters, 2004; Polovina, 1984) .  The  food 
web is modelled using functional groups , defined each as single species or group of  species (i.e., 
grouped by  similarities in size, food preferences, predators , habitats  and life cycles). Ecopath is 
parameterized based on two master equations, t he first one describe s the producti on of each 
functional group, and the second the energy balance. 
𝐵𝑖 × (
𝑃
𝐵)
𝑖
= ∑ 𝐵𝑗 × (
𝑄
𝐵)
𝑗
× 𝐷𝐶𝑗𝑖
𝑁
𝑗=1 + (
𝑃
𝐵)
𝑖
× 𝐵𝑖 × (1 − 𝐸𝐸𝑖) + 𝑌𝑖 + 𝐸𝑖 + 𝐵𝐴𝑖     (Eq. 1) 
𝑄𝑖 = 𝑃𝑖 + 𝑅𝑖 + 𝑈𝐴𝑖           (Eq. 2) 
where 𝐵𝑖 is the biomass of 𝑖 (t·km-²), (
𝑃
𝐵)
𝑖
 is the production rate (yr-1), EE is the ecotrophic efficiency 
(i.e. the fraction of total production used in the system), (
𝑄
𝐵)
𝑗
 is the  consumption rate (yr -1), 𝐷𝐶𝑗𝑖 is 
the fraction of prey 𝑖  by weight in the average diet of predator 𝑗, 𝑌𝑖 is the catch (t·km-²·yr-1), 𝐸𝑖 is the 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
5 
 
net emigration, 𝐵𝐴𝑖 is the biomass accumulation  , 𝑄𝑖 is the consumption, 𝑃𝑖 is the production, 𝑅𝑖 is 
the respiration and 𝑈𝐴𝑖 is the unassimilated food caused by excretion and egestion.  Therefore, the 
model assumes that for each trophic group 𝑖, the production is equal to the sum of all predations, 
the biomass removed by other natural causes (non-predation), catches, exports (net migration), and 
biomass accumulation. 
Ecosim, the dynamic  version of Ecopath , is based on  a set of differential equations that predicts  
changes in biomass and biomass flow rates by taking into account modifications in predator -prey 
relationships, dietary preferences and changes in fishing mortality (detailed equations in Walters et 
al., 1997 and 2000; Pauly et al., 2000; Christensen et al. , 2005). Thus, the biomass growth rate of a 
group 𝑖  during a time t interval (derived from Eq. 1) is expressed as: 
𝑑𝐵𝑖
𝑑𝑡 = 𝑔𝑖 × ∑ 𝑄𝑗𝑖
𝑁
𝑗=1 − ∑ 𝑄𝑖𝑗
𝑁
𝑗=1 + 𝐼𝑖 − (𝑀0𝑖 + 𝐹𝑖 + 𝑒𝑖) × 𝐵𝑖     (Eq. 3) 
where 𝑔𝑖  is the net growt h efficiency, 𝑀0𝑖 the non -predation natural mortality rate, 𝑄𝑗𝑖 is the 
consumption of prey 𝑗 by group 𝑖, 𝑄𝑖𝑗 is the consumption of group 𝑖 by predator 𝑗,  𝐼𝑖 is the 
immigration flow (t·km-²·yr-1), 𝐹𝑖 is the annual fishing mortality rate, and 𝑒𝑖 is the emigration rate. The 
𝑄𝑗𝑖 parameter, which is determined by pred ator-prey relationships, is based  on the foraging arena 
theory, in which it is assumed that spat ial and temporal restrictions i n predator and prey activity 
cause partitioning of each prey  population into vulnerable and invulnerable components (Ahrens et 
al., 2012; Walters and Kitchell, 2001). 
 
2.2.2 Functional groups definition and data sources 
A first Ecopath model of the whole Celtic Sea and the Bay of Biscay continental shelf was built by 
Guénette and Gascuel (2009) and u pdated by Bentorcha (2014) and Bentorcha et al.  (2017). Here, 
using complementary and updated information , we derived distinct models for each ecosystem (i.e. 
the Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea)  and for each 1980 and 2013 . Exploited functional groups (e.g. 
demersal fish: seabass, blue whiting, hake, haddock, megrim, whiting, sole, plaice and boarfish and 
for small pelagic fish groups: horse mackerel, mackerel, herring, anchovy and sardine) were given 
special attention because of their economic importance which yields better parameters estimation 
(biomass, catch, natural mortality, fishing mortality). Hake and cod were split into two stanza s (adult 
and juvenile, with a transition age of 24 months, the age of recruitment to the fishery). 
Other f unctional groups were defined on the basis of ecological criteria (trophic level, maximum 
length, feeding type etc.) and data availability. T en functional groups were defined for other 
exploited species: two cartilaginous fish groups (large sharks and sharks/rays), five “multi -species” 
groups (large, medium and small demersal fish species; large and medium pelagic fish species) , and 
three groups of exploited invertebrates (cephalopods, l obsters/crabs and shrimps). The two models 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
6 
 
also included two seabirds groups (Lassalle et al., 2012; Lauria, 2012), five benthic invertebrates 
groups (Lassalle et al., 2012), three zooplankton groups (defined by their sizes) and three primary 
producers (La ssalle et al., 2012). Finally, a bacteria group and a box for discards from commercial 
fisheries were added to the previous model developed by Bentorcha et al. (201 7), following other 
models developed in European seas (Lassalle et al., 2011 and 2012; Macki nson and Daskalov, 2008; 
Sánchez and Olaso, 2004). 
Thus, the models include 43 trophic boxes (i.e. functional groups) for the Bay of Biscay and 48 trophic 
boxes for the Celtic Sea ecosystem.  Among these, 7 and 14 groups respectively, in the Bay of Biscay 
and in the Celtic Sea, were fully assessed by ICES expert working groups . In addition, for 11 and 4 
groups respectively, time series of relative biomass were available from surveys and data -limited 
assessments (Table 1, detailed composition of groups in Supplementary material S1). 
 
2.2.3 Model input parameter (B, P/B, and Q/B EE), diet and fisheries data 
Biomass estimates from ICES stock assessments were  used as input parameters for all assessed fish 
groups (Table S2 in Supplementary material) . A correction prorated with catch data was applied to 
groups whose distribution is wider than the model led area  (hake, boarfish, mackerel and horse 
mackerel). For juvenile cod and hake , b iomass was determined according to specific growth and 
mortality paramet ers that were used to link the two stanzas. The marine mammal biomass 
estimations used by Guénette and Gascuel (2009) were retained and considered equal in both 
ecosystems. Seabird biomass data were obtained from Lassalle et al. (2012) and Lauria  (2012), based 
on scientific surveys. For other groups, the biomass was estimated with the mass -balanced 
calculations of Ecopath by setting ecotrophic efficiency (EE). This also applies for non -assessed 
demersal groups for which biomass could be estimated directly from E VHOE surveys using an 
arbitrary value for catchability. We considered that it is more reliable to estimate these biomasses 
using Ecopath, and then check for consistency of such estimates with survey and catch data  and 
verify that the resulti ng F=Y/B ratio is consistent with expert knowledge on fisheries.  Similarly, the 
biomass of phytoplankton groups was estimated by the model and compared to values  provided by 
the Sea Around Us Project (www.seaaroundus.org) for the large marine ecosystem based on SeaWifs 
data. 
According to Allen (1971), the P/B ratio was estimated for each group using equation: P/B=F+M, 
where F is fishing mortality and M natural mortality. For assessed groups, fishing mortality is the ratio 
between catches (Y) and biomass (B). When it was possible, natural mortality rates were obtained 
from ICES. Otherwise, natural mortality was estimated from the empirical equation proposed by 
Hoenig (1983) or Pauly (1980). Q/B ratio was calculated based on the empirical equation described in 
Palomares and Pauly (1998). In the previous models  (Bentorcha et al. , 2017; Guénette and Gascuel, 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
7 
 
2009), diet values were extracted from a large review of the scientific literature on the study area or 
on similar close ecosystems (Table S3 in Supplementary Material). In this study, four diet matrices 
were derived from previous model s, one matrix for each  year (1980 or 2013) and ecosystem . To 
reflect main change s in prey abundance between 1980 and 2013 , initial matrices were corrected 
proportionally to biomasses. Diet for benthic invertebrates and zooplankton groups were based on 
the Ecopath model constructed by Lassalle et al. (2012, 2011) (Supplementary Materials S4).  
For tuna (functional group of large pelagic s), catch data came from ICCAT statistics  database 
(https://www.iccat.int/en/accesingdb.htm). For all other exploited species, the fisheries landings 
from 1980 to 2013 were provided by the ICES stock assessment working groups and by the Stat lant 
database compiled by ICES (http://www.ices.dk/marine-data/dataset-collections/Pages/Fish-catch-
and-stock-assessment.aspx). Starting in 1980, most landings were recorded by ICES subdivision (for 
instance, VIIIa or VIIIb). The few landing data (less than 5%) reported at the division level were pro-
rated based o n surface area to obtain an estimate at the subdivision scale. In both ecosystems , 
discards are known to occur, mainly in demersal fisheries , so  for assessed stocks, we used a 15% 
discard rate as estimated by ICES. Based on expert advice, the discard rate was set at 40% for pouts 
and at 15% for other exploited groups (excluding Large Sharks),  
 
2.2.4 Balancing the Ecopath models and fitting Ecosim 
The 2013 Ecopath models of each ecosystem, based on the most reliable  and recent data , were 
balanced first. Thus, t he balancing process ensured consistency between all available information.  
Balancing was conducted following a strategy called “top -down”. First, the production/consumption 
(i.e. gross efficiency), the respiration/assimilation and the production/respiration ratios were  
controlled to fall within a realistic range of  values (e.g.  P/Q within 0.1 and 0.3 according to 
Christensen et al. (2005) ). Then, when the EE parameter was greater than one, we corrected, with 
parsimony, the diet matrix, and/or P/B or Q/B ratios. For instance, the P/B ratio of pelagic species 
such as horse mackerel and mackerel were revised up while the P/B  ratio for large sharks and 
anglerfish, which induces a significant top -down control,  was revised downwards . Moreover, 
cannibalism within some groups (e.g. hake) was reduced. The P/B ratio of the bacteria group, initially 
taken from Lassalle et al. (2012) , was increased to balance the model and to be consistent with the 
published literature (see for example , Mackinson and Daskalov, 2008) . Finally, as the diets of some 
multi-specific groups was relatively uncertain (e.g. small, medium and large demersals or medium 
and large pelagics) , balancing has consisted in adjusting their diet grad ually and moderately.  The 
model consistency was checked in three ways: 1. comparing the biomass estimates of non -assessed 
demersal fish groups with values we derived from E VHOE surveys data ; 2.  calculating the fishing 
mortality for all exploited groups ; 3. using the Prebal tool of the EwE software, to check the 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
8 
 
consistency of B, P/B, and Q/P parameters, according to the “rules of thumb” defined by Link (2010) 
and Heymans et al. (2016). The 1980 models were derived from the balanced 2013 models, changing 
values of catches (Y), biomass (B) and productivity (P/B ), according to the available stock assessment 
data. The balancing process  led again to correct ing the diet matrix to take into account changes in 
prey abundance.  
Ecosim models were fitted to biomass and catch data over the 1980-2013 period, using time series of 
fishing mortality as an index of fishing effort (i.e. as forcing functions). The time series were built 
using biomass estimates and fishing mortalities provided by ICES working groups for all a ssessed 
stocks (Table 1). For all other demersal groups  in the Bay of Biscay , biomass indices were derived 
from EVHOE surveys  that started in 1988. Thus, the data set includes biomass time series ( used as 
relative values) for 18 groups, both in the Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea. Time series of catches are 
available for all the exploited groups (30 and 34 groups in the Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea, 
respectively) from ICES working group reports for assessed stocks, and from the Statlant database for 
the others. Model fitting was achieved by estimating the vulnerability parameters that minimize the 
sum of squared deviations  between logarithms of observed and predicted biomass and catches, for 
all groups for which time series were available. The model was fitted to abundance and/or catch time 
series data using an iterative fitting procedure as described in Christensen et al . (2008). The Akaike 
Information Criteria (AIC) and the sum of squared deviations were used to measure how well the 
models fit the data.  Vulnerabilities vary from one (i.e. a bottom -up control) to infinity (i.e. a top -
down control) and can be interpreted as a reaction coefficient of a predator group to a change in 
abundance of its prey. In this study, vulnerabilities were estimated “by predator” following the 
adjustment routines of the EwE software. In addition, we used recruitment anomalies as 
environmental variables to improve the fit. These anomalies are calculated as the ratio between a 
given annual recruitment and the recruitment of the starting year (Bentorcha et al., 2017). They were 
applied to all groups assumed to be highly dependent of the environment, namely blue whiting, 
horse mackerel, mackerel, anchovy, sardine, herring, juvenile hake and juvenile cod. Recruitm ent 
anomalies are used as forcing functions on prey  consumption, thereby affecting the productivity of 
forced groups. 
 
2.2.5 Simulation of fishing scenarios 
Using Ecosim, simulations were performed to assess the effect of various fishing mortality levels on 
the Bay of Biscay ecosystem . The Ecosim model previously fitted to past time series was used  in 
forecast mode over the 2014 to 2030 period  which was assumed sufficient to reach equilibrium . All 
simulations assumed constant recruitment at the 2013 level.  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
9 
 
A fir st group of scenarios considers different values of F proposed in the literature from actual 
management targets to more ecosystem-based considerations (Table 2). The first simulation uses the 
status quo value (F=F2013), and is considered as a baseline. The second scenario uses an F equal or 
lower than FMSY when Fmsy is known. The third scenario applied F≤0.25 (e.g. Worm et al 2009) and the 
fourth F≤M (e.g . MacCall, 2009). The last two scenarios investigate the effect of a more important 
reduction in F for d emersal fish (F≤0.8*M, Walter and Martell, 2004) and pelagic fish (F≤0.6*M, 
Patterson, 1992).   
A second group of scenarios simulates a reduction in F through the removal of fishing fleets . 
Although such scenarios are unrealistic, it is an interesting theoretical exercise to assess the specific 
impact of each fleet and to investigate the consequences of the removal of different species 
assemblages on the food web structure. Fishing fleets are defined according to the definition found 
in the French Observer at Sea Program (OBSMER, Cornou et al., 2015). Partial mortalities by fleet 
segment and by group were prorated with the relative catches in the last available year (2013). Each 
scenario simulates the removal of one of the following fishing fleets: the nephrops trawlers, the 
bottom trawlers, the pelagic trawlers, the small (<15 meters) and large gillnetters (>15 meters) , and 
the long liners-hand liners.   
Trends from all Ecosim scenarios were compared t o the status quo scenario  using trophic spectra  
(see next section) . Then, t he ecosystem effects and trade -offs between scenarios were analysed 
based on a set of indicators including: the mean trophic level (TL) of the biomass that reflects the 
impact of fishing on the entire network (MTL B, Pauly et al. (1998)), the marine trophic index that 
measures the impact of fishing on high TLs ( MTI, Pauly and Watson, 2005), the mean trophic level of 
the catch (MTLy, Pauly et al., 1998), the primary production requir ed to support fisheries (PPR, Pauly 
and Christensen (1995)) and the total biomass and catches. We also used two new indicators 
proposed by Bourdaud et al. (2016 ): the high trophic level indicator (HTI) which is the ratio of  the 
biomass of apex predators (TL>4) on the total biomass of consumers (TL>2) present in the ecosystem, 
and the apex predator indicator (API) , the ratio of apex predator s biomass on the biomass of all 
groups whose trophic level is greater than 3.25. 
 
2.3 The EcoTroph model 
2.3.1 Principles and equations of EcoTroph 
EcoTroph (ET; Gascuel, 2005; Gascuel and Pauly, 2009)  represents the continuous distribution of the 
ecosystem biomass B (or production P, or catch Y, etc.) across TLs, and can simulate the distribution 
changes induced by fishing . This distribution is called the biomass (or production, or catch, etc.) 
trophic spectrum (Gascuel et al ., 2005). Moreover, trophic spectra can be calculated for fishing 
mortalities (Fτ=Yτ/Bτ) and fishing loss rate ( τ =Yτ/Pτ)  which give two different imag es of the 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
10 
 
exploitation situation of the ecosystem : the fishing mortality spectrum reflects  which TLs are 
currently targeted, whereas the fishing loss rate spectrum reflects the level of impact of fishing on 
each TL (Gasche et al., 2012).  
Conventionally, t he continuous distribution is approximated in the ET model by a discrete 
distribution, using trophic classes whose width is Δτ = 0.1 TL (Gascuel, 2005). The biomass enters the 
food web at TL=1, generated by the photosynthetic activity of primary producers and recycled by the 
microbial loop. There is usually no biomass between TLs 1 and 2, herbivores and detritivores being at 
TL 2. At TLs >2, the biomass is distributed along a continuum of values of TL, the diet variability of the 
various consumers resulting in all fractional TLs being filled (Gascuel, 2005; Gascuel and Pauly, 2009). 
Biomass moves from one class to the  next according to predation and ontogenic processes. From  a 
given secondary production occurring at trophic level 2, the eco system biomass distribution can 
therefore be expressed as the result of the biomass flow passing through the ecosystem, from low to 
high trophic levels (Gascuel, 2005). Thus, the model is constructed from two major equations derived 
from fluid mechanics. In steady-state conditions, the biomass at TL τ is calculated as: 
𝐵𝜏 =
𝛷𝜏
𝐾𝜏
× ∆𝜏           (Eq. 4) 
where 𝐵𝜏 is the biomass present in the trophic class [τ, τ+Δτ[, 𝐾𝜏 is the flow kinetics and 𝛷𝜏 is the 
mean flow of biomass passing through trophic classes. 
Because natural losses occur during trophic transfer (natural processes o f respiration, excretion and 
egestion, non-predation mortality and  removals by fisheries ), the biomass flow is a decreasing 
function of TL: 
𝛷𝜏+∆𝜏 = 𝛷𝜏 × 𝑒𝑥𝑝(−(𝜇𝜏 + 𝜑𝜏) × ∆𝜏)        (Eq. 5) 
where μτ and φτ are the natural loss rate and the fishing loss rate  over a [τ, τ+Δτ[  interval, 
respectively. 
The last version of EcoTroph distinguishes  two compartments, one accessible to the fishery and the 
other not (Gascuel et al., 2011) . The accessibility to fisheries parameter corresponds to the 
proportion of a species or g roup that would be caught under the hypothesis of an infinite fishing 
effort. The same ET equations are used for both compartments, but their parameters differ since 
they take into account the fact that exploited species usually do not have the same characteristics as 
the unexploited ones, especially at low or intermediate trophic levels (Colléter et al., 2015; Gasche et 
al., 2012; Gascuel et al., 2011) . Thus, parameters of the accessible part of the biomass are noted 
Bτ∗ , φτ∗ or Fτ∗. For each trophic group in the Ecopath model, a fishing accessibility coefficient, which 
varies from 0 to 1, is  defined according to the selectivity that protect s juveniles, the refuge effect in 
areas inaccessible to fishing operations, the presence of non -fished species within distinct Ecopath 
multispecific groups and the permanent arrival of fish via dispersal or  migration for species whose 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
11 
 
distribution range is larger than the study area (Bentorcha et al., 201 7; Gascuel et al., 2011) . 
Additional details for EcoTroph can be found in a number of papers (see e.g. Gascuel et al., 2011; 
Halouani et al., 2015) , and the software  is freely available either as an R package  (Colléter et al.,  
2013), or as a plug-in module for EwE version 6.  
 
2.3.2 EcoTroph parametrization and use 
In the present study, analyses were performed with the R-EcoTroph package. Using the ET-Transpose 
sub-routine, biomass and catches of each functional group from Ecopath were distributed over a 
range of trophic classes around the mean TL of the group (estimate d by Ecopath model), thus 
providing trophic spectra of biomass, catch, and fishing mortalities . This approach allows for a 
comparison of the 1980 and 2013 Ecopath models.  
The ET-diagnosis sub-routine was used to establish a diagnosis of the fishing impact on the food web 
in both ecosystems in 2013. To do this, the accessibility parameter was fixed to zero for trophic boxes 
that are not exploited and determined following the available literature (ICES working group 
publications) or expert knowledge for groups targeted or caught as bycatch in fisheries (Tables S2 
and S3). Then, the effects of increasing or decreasing fishing pressure on ecosystem functioning were 
simulated using effort multiplier s varying between 0 (simulation of a no fishing scenario) and 3,  
applied to the 2013 fishing mortality F. The ET -Diagnosis routine takes as input two parameters 
affecting ecosystem functioning: the top-down parameter α which specifies the magnitude o f the 
control of predators on the abundance of their prey, and the shape parameter γ which defines the 
functional relationship between prey and predators  (Gascuel and Pauly, 20 09). Default values for  α 
and γ were fixed in EcoTroph to 0.4 and 0.5, respectively. 
EcoTroph also calculates two fishing indicators to evaluate the exploitation state of the food web 
(Gasche et al., 2012): mFMSY,τ , the fishing mortality multiplier giving the highest catch for each trophic 
level (thus overfishing occurs at level  τ when mFMSY,τ < 1) and mF 0.1,τ, the fishing mortality multiplier 
for which the slope of the catch per trophic level as a function of effort becomes inferior to a tenth 
(0.1) of the slope at the origin. By convention, the value mF 0.1,τ = 1 defines the low er limit of the full 
exploitation (Gasche et al., 2012) . Fishing indicators mF 0.1 and mF MSY are commonly used in single 
species assessment and we used them to establish an overall ecosystem-scale diagnosis. 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
12 
 
3 Results 
3.1 Results of the Ecopath models and EcoTroph diagnostics 
3.1.1 Current state of ecosystems 
Based on the 2013 Ecopath models, the total biomass of the Bay of Biscay ecosystem is 229.6 t·km-2 
including trophic level 1 and 85.6 t ·km-2 for animals only (TLs ≥ 2) (Table S2 in the supplement ary 
material). The Celtic Sea ecosystem displays a higher biomass of 461.6 t·km-2 for all trophic levels, and 
118.4 t·km-2 for animals only  (Table S 2). The a ccessible biomass  (B*), the fraction of ecosystem 
biomass accessible to fisheries , is 7.3 and 8.3 t ·km-2 for the Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea 
respectively, and catches amount to 1.9 and 2.1 t·km-2 year-1 respectively.  
In both ecosystems, a decrease in  total biomass was observed from the lower to higher TLs  (Fig. 2). 
The biomass at trophic levels close to 2.3 is composed of  various groups of zooplankton (i.e.  micro 
and mesozooplankton groups) and benthic invertebrates such as subsurface deposit feeders and 
suprabenthic invertebrates.  In both systems, a peak in biomass was observed between TLs 3 and 3.5  
which are composed of pelagic fish (e.g. anchovy, herring, sardine ) and various demersal fish (e.g. 
sole, plaice and other demersal groups). Predatory species such as hake, cod, anglerfish, seabass and 
large sharks have a trophic level around 4.5. The observed gap in the biomass spectrum at around TL 
2.7 is mainly due to the small number of trophic groups present (e.g. macrozooplankton group) . In 
both ecosystems, the larger accessible biomass is observed  between TL 3 and 4.5 , with more 
exploited species (or groups) in higher trophic levels. At around TL 4.7, selectivity (B*/B ratio) reaches 
a maximum of 0.75 (Table S2).  
In both Bay of Biscay and Celtic Sea, the fishery targets a variety of ecological groups with TLs ranging 
from 3 to 5  (Fig 2). Fishing mortality for high TL s is slightly higher in the Bay of Biscay  (at around 0.3 
year-1) because the fisheries target predatory species such as hake or seabass . Trophic levels 
between 3.5 and 4.0 (mainly pelagics and small to medium various demersals) are less targeted 
(F<0.2 year-1). Nevertheless, i n both ecosystems, a peak of catches was observed at TL 3.5 
corresponding to horse mackerel, macker el, and other small pelagic fish like sardine, herring and 
sprat. These catc hes represent approximately 25 % of the accessible biomass at TL 3.5.  The fishing 
loss rate, which measures the proportion of the production caught each year, increases with trophic 
level (Fig 2). TLs between 2 and 2.8 (benthic invertebrates such as bivalves and small crustaceans)  
were lightly exploited (fishing loss of 5 -15%), while catches of intermediate TLs (small pelagics) 
amount to 30 % of their annual production and that of TL s higher than  4 (hake, anglerfish, megrim, 
cod, seabass, large sharks, etc.)  amount to 60-70 % . The 2013 Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea 
ecosystems appear to have similar trophic structure  with trophic spectra of biomas s, catches and 
fishing mortalities roughly exhibiting the same shape. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
13 
 
 
3.1.2 Changes observed between 1980 and 2013 
In the Bay of Biscay, trophic levels higher than 4.2 (mainly demersal species such as hake, whiting, 
anglerfish and large demersal) appeared to be less targeted in 2013, compared to  1980, with a 
fishing mortality reduced by more than 5 % at TL 4.7  (Fig. 3). However, this decrease is rather small, 
given the management measures adopted by the European Union in the late 1990s (precautionary 
approach) and then in the late 2000s (MSY mana gement). For instance, fishing mortality decreased 
by about 20 % for hake, whiting and large pelagics, but remained almost unchanged for anglerfish or 
megrim and more than doubled for seabass . The biomass of high TLs classes increased by over 10 % 
as a result of the fishing mortality reduction and the occurrence of good recruitments. In particular, 
hake spawning stock biomass reached 200 000 t in 2013 from 100 000 t in 1980. Despite the fishing 
mortality reduction, the increase in biomass allowed the 2013 catches to increase to the 1980 level 
for these high TLs.  
At intermediate trophic levels  (mainly pelagic fish), successful recruitments led to a 20% increase in 
biomass, and up to 30 % for TL 3.5. Fishing mortalities increased by 31 % on average for TLs between 
3 and 4 . For instance, fishing mortality increased  from 0.04 to 0.19 year -1 for horse mackerel. The 
increase in effort resulted in a 2-fold increase in catches at TL 3.5 between 1980 and 2013 (from 0.11 
to 0.21 t km-², respectively). 
In the Celtic Sea, the comparison between the 1980 and 2013 Ecopath models tells a different story. 
Fishing mortalities for high TLs (between 4.2 and 5) remained at a rather low level (around 0.24 year -
1, Figure 3). Their biomass increased by 58 %, likely due to favourable environmental conditions (with 
a growing biomass for large sharks, rays, hake, cod, whiting, megrim), while catches increased in the 
same proportion (+53%). At intermediate TLs, fishing pressure strongly increased (F was doubled at 
TL 3.6), w hile biomass declined ( -13% on average between TL 3.5 and 4.0, mainly due to horse 
mackerel and mackerel). However, at TL 3.6, the decline is partly compensated by boarfish, an 
emerging species whose stock biomass was boosted by successive good recruitment s. Total catch 
between TL 3.5 and 4.0 increased by 55 %, mainly driven by boarfish and horse mackerel. 
Additionally, the trophic flow kinetic (which quantifies the velocity of biomass transfers in the food 
web) has increased by 47 % at TL 3.6 as a result of change in species composition. 
 
3.1.3 Diagnosis of the Exploitation status of ecosystems 
In the Bay of Biscay, EcoTroph simulations showed a clear improvement of the exploitation stat us in 
2013 compared to 1980 (Fig. 4). In 1980, all trophic classes greater than 4.4 were overfished (Fmsy <1) 
(these trophic levels include some of the ecosystem’s most economically important predator species 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
14 
 
such as hake, seabass, anglerfish, large pelagic fish) whereas nowadays, overexploitation starts at TL 
4.7 (mainly large sharks). Thus, trophic classes between 4.4 and 4.6 shifted from  overfishing in 1980 
to sustainable fishing in 2013. Moreover, Fmsy for TL above 4.8 are closer to one in 2013 than in 1980, 
which suggests less overexploitation. Indeed in 1980, fishing effort at TL 5.0 would have had to be 
reduced by 40% to shift from overfishing to full exploitation (mFMSY=0.6), while in 2013 the reduction 
required to reach full exploitation is only 10% (mFMSY=0.9). This improvement in the status of high TL 
classes is partly the result of fishing effort reduction initiated in the early 2000s , which enabled the 
(slow) recovery of some stocks, and of some good recruitments ( e.g. hake) due to favourable 
environmental conditions. 
In the Celtic Sea ecosystem, EcoTroph simulations showed no clear improvement between 1980 and 
2013 (Figure 4). In both years, the full exploitation is reached for trophic classes between TL 4.1 and 
4.4 (cod, juvenile hake, whiting, sharks and rays) with overfishing for trophic levels higher than TL 4.4 
(large sharks, large pelagics, anglerfish, seabass, hake, megrim). Furthermore, in 2013, fishing effort 
at TL 5.0 should be reduced by 40% to reach the full exploitation state. 
In both ecosystems , values of mF MSY and mF 0.1 suggest that trophic levels lower that 4.0 are 
moderately exploited. These overly optimistic results are due, in part, to the fact that some groups 
(such as sole at TL 3.2) are aggregated with other very abundant groups (as carnivorous and 
necrophagous benthic invertebrates) ,  lightly fished, that  could support a strong increase in fishing 
effort before being overfished.  
 
3.2  Ecosim results and simulation of fishing scenarios 
3.2.1 Biomass and catch trends over the 1980-2013 period 
In both ecosystems, the best fit of the Ecosim model wa s obtained using both fishing mortalities and 
recruitment anomalies as forcing functions (see Table S5.1 in Supplementary Material, for AIC and SS 
results). Recruitment anomalies, assumed to be a proxy of the effects of environmental conditions, 
appeared especially important for the fit of stanza groups and monospecific pelagic groups such as 
anchovy, sardine  (mediocre fit) , herring, mackerel  (still not very good  fit), and, to a lesser extent 
horse mackerel. Trends in hake predicted biomass, in the Bay of B iscay, were close to the observed 
values, with a decrease until the 2000s mainly due to high fishing pressure, and a sharp increase 
since 2008 which can only be obtained by taking into account the occurrence of good recruitment 
over the last decade  (Fig. S5.2). In both ecosystems, we note that fishing mortalities on demersals 
show similar temporal trends with an increase between 1980 and 1990, a plateau between 1990 and 
2005, followed with a decrease between 2005 and 2010. Thus, since 2010, fishing mortalities remain 
stable and close to  the 1980 assessed level  (Fig. 5). In contrast with pelagic catches, fluctuations of 
observed demersals catches are not well reproduced by the models in both ecosystems. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
15 
 
In the Bay of Biscay, the biomass of demersal fish estim ated from Ecosim increased since the mid-
1990s, and reached a level 28% higher in 2013 than in 1980 (Fig. 5). This is especially the case for 
groups such as small and medium demersal  fish and hake. Small demersals benefited from a release 
of predation , due to the decrease in horse mackerel biomass, while medium demersal s and hake 
benefited from a release of the fishing pressure and from an increase in prey abundance . The 
biomass of pelagics decreased as the demersal biomass increased. This decline is ma inly caused by 
horse mackerel, while in contrast , the sardine biomass increased slightly over the stud y period, due 
to good recruitments.  According to the Ecosim model, the predation mortality of hake on horse 
mackerel rose from 0.04 to around 0.14 year -1 between 2000 and 2013, and is a significant driver of 
the downward trend observed for horse mackerel biomass. The model reproduces pretty well the 
peak of pelagics catches in the early 2000s and the following decline associated with the decrease in 
fishing pressure and biomass. This change is mainly driven by two groups: anchovy , for which there 
has been a fishery closure between 2006 and 2010 , and horse mackerel for which fishing mortality 
decreased after 1996 (Fig. 5). Thus, the predicted trends (and the trophic functioning) for the Bay of 
Biscay ecosystem appear to be controlled by two main groups: hake and horse mackerel. 
In the Celtic Sea, the recovery of demersal biomass occurs earlier than in the Bay of Biscay but is less 
pronounced (+15% in 2013 compared to 1980). Th e predicted increase in predation  was mainly 
caused by two groups  (result not shown)  who’s fishing mortalities decreased over the period: 
anglerfish (biomass from 0.44 t·km-² in 1980 to 1.12 t·km-² in 2013) and haddock (from 0.31 to 0.86 
t·km-²). The recent increase in hake biomass is not well captured by the Ecosim model due to an 
increase of anglerfish (potential predator) in the same period. Overall, the rising demersal biomass 
led to an increase in catches despite the re duction in fishing mortality in the last decade. In contrast 
with the Bay of Biscay , pelagics biomass declined continuously since the mid -1990s, mainly due to 
horse mackerel ( -12% in 2013 compared to 1980) , strongly impacted by an increase in fishing 
mortality and predation by anglerfish and whiting. On the contrary, mackerel would have benefited 
from a decrease in fishing pressure since 2003, a general decline in predation until 2007 , and large 
recruitments over the last years  (but biomass did not increase according to Fig. S5.3). Overall, the 
increase in fishing pressure on pelagic fish in the late 2000s led to very substantial catches but at the 
cost of a decrease in biomass for some groups such as horse mackerel.  
 
3.2.2 Simulations of fishing scenario in the Bay of Biscay up to 2030 
Bearing in mind  the poor Ecosim fits for the recent years in the Celtic Sea ecosystem , simulations 
were performed for the Bay of Biscay only. Ecosim simulation using the status quo scenario suggests 
that most exploited groups require 6 to 7 years to reach their equilibrium values (not shown). 
Maintaining fishing pressure at the 2013 level is predicted to cause a 10% decrease in the abundance 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
16 
 
of higher trophic levels su ch as whiting, toothed whales, seabass, hake, anglerfish, large demersals 
and large pelagics, while the biomass of intermediate trophic levels such as mackerel, horse mackerel 
and sardine is predicted to decrease  by 18%. Thus, under status quo, the main ex ploited groups of 
the Bay of Biscay would likely not recover.  
Three of the scenarios,  F≤FMSY, F≤M and F≤0.25, show similar patterns regarding predicted biomass 
trends (Fig. 6) although the groups affected vary . For example, fishing mortalities are reduced for 
sole, hake, megrim, anglerfish and Norway lobster  in the F≤0.25 scenario, and for blue whiting, sole, 
hake, mackerel and horse mackerel  in the F≤FMSY scenario. The three scenarios predict that  high TLs 
(>4.2) would be positively impacted by the reduct ion in fishing pressure (+5%  in biomass), while the 
biomass of intermediate trophic levels would decrease (-3%) due to top-down controls which are not 
compensated by the reduction in fishing pressure. The t otal biomass would decrease (Table 3)  
because the higher biomass of high TLs does not compensate for losses at intermediate TLs. Also, 
reducing fishing mortality would likely result in a lower catch than that of the status quo and in an 
increase in the trophic level of both catches and biomass , as expressed by the ecological indicators 
API, HTI and MTI.  
The last two fishing scenarios aim to protect demersals (F demersal) or pelagics (F pelagic) (Table 2). 
The F demersal  scenario is predicted  to result in a 5% increase in biomass for high trophic levels 
(seabass, anglerfish, sharks and rays) and in an indirect negative impact induced by predation on 
intermediate trophic levels (mainly on horse mackerel, mackerel, medium and small demersals). This 
scenario would maximise ecological indicato rs related to the ecosystem trophic structure and 
especially to high trophic level (MTI, HTI and API), minimise the primary production required (PPR) , 
and result in the lowest biomass and catch. The mean trophic level of the catch (MTLY) would be low, 
due to smaller catches at high TLs , while those of lower TLs would be  maintained. The F  pelagic 
scenario results in a decrease in fishing mortality by half for mackerel and horse mackerel and would 
benefit all higher TLs (hake, seabass, megrim and various seabirds) through prey-predator 
relationships (i.e. bottom -up controls). Compared to the other s, t his scenario exhibits the highest 
values of total biomass, total catches and MTLB. Nevertheless, there is no discernible improvement of 
the trophic structure of the Bay of Biscay ecosystem, as all other indicators (MTI, HTI, PPR and MTL Y) 
are similar to that of the status quo scenario. This scenario also exhibits the smallest API value.   
In practice, a reduction in fishing intensity could be achieved in many w ays. Figure 7 illustrates that 
the removal of different fleets would result in very  different effects on the food web structure. 
Indeed, the removal of the two most important fishing fleets, the bottom trawlers and the large 
gillnetters (> 15 m ), would have a large impact on the entire trophic structure (Fig. 7).  Bottom 
trawlers induce a reduction in biomass at the higher trophic levels (around 9%) and cause a release 
of the predation pressure (by top -down control) on intermediate trophic levels (approx imately +9% 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
17 
 
of biomass at TL=3.5). Large gillnetters have a negative impact on the higher trophic levels, especially 
on hake, and cause a decrease of about 5% on the biomass of trophic class TL=5, resulting in a top -
down induced increase for intermediate T Ls (such as mackerel and horse mackerel). Thus, through 
cascading effect, bottom trawlers and large gillnetters impact all TLs between 2 and 5, inducing 
changes in species comp osition and benefiting intermediate and low trophic levels characterised by 
high turnover rates (e.g. small pelagic fish, benthic invertebrates, etc.). The impacts of other fleets 
operating in the Bay of Biscay are less pronounced, due to the small landings and /or the reduced 
spatial coverage (e .g. Nephrops trawlers).  However, pelagic trawlers, which target mainly anchovy, 
sardine and to a lesser extent mackerel and the medium pelagics, have a larger impact on high 
trophic levels than on the targeted trophic levels. The effect of pelagic trawlers,  although weak, due 
to limited f ishing effort, highlights the bottom -up control of prey on their predators  and thus, the 
ecosystem effects of prey exploitation.  
 
4 Discussion 
4.1 Models limitations and perspectives 
Ecosystem models, especially trophic models, have a key role to play in improv ing scientific 
knowledge on exploited marine ecosystems, and in the development of management scenarios for 
an ecosystem approach to fisheries (Coll et al., 2015). Despite the many uncertainties inherent to 
their uses, EwE and EcoTroph models provide an op portunity to represent marine ecosystems in a 
simplified form, to test the consistency of the available data and to explore  the long -term 
development of complex systems (Christensen and Walters, 2004). 
According to Fulton et al. (2003) , the structure and complexity of models have a strong influence on 
the ability to capture the complexity and real properties of an ecosystem. In this study, we chose to 
focus on commercially important species in the perspective of developing an ecosystem -based 
fisheries management. The structure of our models (composed of 43 and 48 functional groups, for 
the Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea respectively) follows the trend  observed in the scientific 
community to increase complexity and number of compartments in Ecopath models ( Colléter et al., 
2015b). For example, the “North Sea” model developed by Mackinson and Daskalov (2008) is 
composed of 68 functional groups, and the “Celtic Sea” model built by Lauria (2012) to study seabirds 
includes 64 functional groups. 
The comparison of structure and diagnosis of the Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea confirms the need 
to consider them separately. However, splitting the initial model of Bentorcha et al. (2017) led to 
empirical adjustment s of some parameters and especially o f the diet matrix. Thus, although the 
initial diet matrix was based on published stomach content analysis from studies performed mainly in 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
18 
 
close or similar ecosystems, it undoubtedly remains the main weakness of our models. To this end, 
the Eatme project , currently conducted by IFREMER , is collecting stomach contents and isotopic 
measurements of the main commercial species, and should provide more robust information for the 
implementation of future trophic models. 
In this work, we used reliable estimates of  biomass and catch, issued from ICES working groups. 
Corrections of catch statistics that were necessary to make up for incomplete time series  and 
geographical distribution were based on the strong assumption that the catch distribution  is related 
to the s tock distribution. Indeed, in spite of potential bias es linked to fishing strategies, the 
distribution of commercial catches usually reflects, at least in  the same order of magnitude, those of 
the underlying populations (Klyashtorin, 1998; Pauly et al., 19 98). Furthermore, this type of 
correction only affects a limited part of the ecosystem biomass and is relatively common in Ecopath 
approaches (see for example Ainsworth et al., 2001; Sánchez and Olaso, 2004).  
The diagnosis of the ecosystems status (1980 a nd 2013) using EcoTroph is sensitive to the 
accessibility coefficients (Colleter et al., 2012; Halouani et al., 2015; Gasche et al., 2012) . 
Nevertheless, changing the accessibilities does not affect the qualitative differences observed 
between ecosystems and time periods. In other words, the contrast we show ed between the Bay of 
Biscay and the Celtic Sea, as well as the improvement in ecosystem status observed in the Bay of 
Biscay should be considered as robust results.  
The Ecosim models we developed suffer from a lack of contrast in the time series and a lack of data 
on fishing effort. Thus, they were not able to properly reproduce some demersals catches 
fluctuations over the period 1980 -2013, which weakens our results both in terms of diagnostics and  
projections. According to Guénette and Gascuel (2012), the largest changes in biomasses and catches 
took place after World War  II, between 1950 and 1980, while the following period is marked by 
relative stability in abundances and catches. The next step to disentangle fishing and environmental 
impacts on these ecosystems would be to rebuild historical time series of catch and fishing effort, 
over the 1950 to 1980 period, and to update Ecopath and Ecosim models. 
Simulations in forecast mode were conducted a ssuming a constant recruitment, which is the usual 
assumption in many approaches related to fisheries management, although it is probably unrealistic 
in the perspective of global change, especially knowing that Ecosim fits were better when including 
recruitment anomaly indices. However, our goal is not to predict the future, but rather to compare 
contrasted theoretical scenarios of fisheries management, all other things being equal. In the same 
way, removing an entire fleet is a theoretical  but unrealistic management scenario in an ecosystem-
based approach to fisheries where socio -economical aspects have to be taken into account  (Garcia 
and Cochrane, 2005). 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
19 
 
The use of ecological indicators  provides additional information on the diversity and the complexity 
of interactions between ecosystem compartments. Even if it is difficult to interpret absolute values of 
such indicators, they are convenient to compare scenarios  (Shannon et al., 2014) . It is noteworthy 
that some indicators used, such as MTLs, are insensitive to change in F, while the two indicators HTI 
and API proposed by Bourdaud et al. (2016) appear more informative . Moreover, additional 
indicators related to habitats , for instance, are also required and deserve to be further developed 
(Cury et al., 2005; Jennings, 2005).  
 
4.2 EwE to understand trophic interactions and monitor food web health 
Several EwE models have been published regarding the north east ern Atlantic ecosystems, with a 
large diversity of objectives. Trophic models are dedicated  to analyse food web interactions and 
ecosystems properties sensu Odum (e.g. Araújo et al., 2005; Lassalle et al., 2011; Lees and 
Mackinson, 2007; Mackinson and Daskalov, 2008) , to assess fisheries and environmental impacts on 
ecosystems (Ainsworth et al., 2011; Araújo et al., 2006; Lassalle et al., 2012; Sánchez and Olaso, 
2004), to explore fisheries strategies (Araújo et al., 2008; Lynam and Mackinson, 2015) , or to assess 
economic or  ecological impacts of Marine Protected Areas (Beattie et al., 2002 ; Guénette et al., 
2014; Valls et al., 2012) . Our models were built specifically to explore the impact of fishing and 
analyse various fishing scenarios for their impact on catch, and food web structure and dynamics.  
Using models built in a consistent way  we showed that exploitation patterns at the ecosystem scale 
are quite similar in both the Bay of Biscay and Celtic Sea ecosystems . However, in the Bay of Biscay, 
fisheries management resulted in a decrease in fishing pressure on the highest TLs , while the 
diagnosis for the Celtic Sea remained almost unchanged. Two factors may explain this difference. 
First, even if high TLs species benefited from some good recruitment years in the Celtic Sea (e.g. cod, 
hake), catches i ncreased proportionally to biomass and thus fishing mortalities remained high. 
Second, biomass of prey fishes increased in the Bay of Biscay  while it decreased in the Celtic Sea. In 
addition, the species composition at intermediate TLs changed with the inc rease in boarfish 
abundance, which seems to lead to faster trophic transfers, and to a less efficient food web with 
potential detrimental effects for predators  (Bentorcha et al., 2017;  Smith et al., 2011) . Our results 
suggest that the observed changes at the stock and the ecosystem (species composition) level, can 
be explained by the interplay between anthropogenic impact and changes in environmental 
conditions.  
The results tend to confirm the beneficial effect of the management measures implemented at the 
European scale since the late 1990s. First, using B pa and F pa as thresholds to calculate the Total 
Allowable Catch (TAC), and the precautionary approach implemented since 1998 (ICES, 1997) in 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
20 
 
European waters , led to restrictive quotas and contributed t o the relative stabilisation or the 
decrease in fishing mortality rates recorded in the late 1990s. Then, in the context of the Com mon 
Fishery Policy , the MSY approach (ICES, 2009) adopted in 2008 and based on more precautionary 
thresholds (FMSY) has led t o a more pronounced decrease in fishing mortality rates at ecosystems 
scales, which enabled a partial recovery for several fish stocks .  However, in some cases , the 
improvement in biomass and reduction in F  result from serendipitous good recruitment years  (e.g. 
hake). In the Bay of Biscay, the overall decrease in fishing pressure only led to a slight increase in 
total biomass.  
Our results suggest that both ecosystems returned more or less to exploitation levels of the early 
eighties. However, according to Guénette and Gascuel (2012), looking back only 20 -30 years would 
lead to believe that the situation is stable and that the ecosystem has not changed in a typical case of 
“shifting baseline” syndrome (Pauly, 1995) . In fact, fishing impacts are still high at the ecosystem 
scale and the progression towards a sustainable exploitation  is too slow to meet the  Common 
Fisheries Policy objective, i.e., all stocks fished at F MSY by 2020 at the latest. Additionally, the primary 
production required to sustain fisheries in 2013, 32% in the Bay of Biscay and 22% in the Celtic Sea, is 
similar to those of the 1980 models. These high PPR values suggest  that fisheries use a high 
proportion of the productive capacity of the continental shelves , and are similar to heavily exploited 
ecosystems studied by Pauly and Christensen (1995). Regarding patterns of exploitation, some of our 
results suggest a combination of fishing down (Pauly et al., 1998)  and fishing through marine food 
web (Essington et al., 2006) , in agreement with previous studies (Gascuel et al., 2016) . This appears 
to be especially the case  in the Bay of Biscay where changes in exploitation patterns were partly 
caused by an increase in abundance of lower trophic levels such as horse mackerel, and by economic 
considerations which encouraged fishing fleets to replace high value groundfish by large volumes of 
lower value fish (Guénette and Gascuel, 2012; Steinmetz et al., 2008). 
 
4.3 EwE to analyse various scenarios of an ecosystem-based fisheries management  
The Ecosim simulations used in forecast mode for the 2014 -2030 period sheds new light on the 
exploitation status of the Bay of Biscay , and on the fishing scenarios that would maintain forage fish 
communities and conserve or restore top predator populations.  This largely depends on the 
respective importance of top -down vs. bottom -up controls in trophic interactions (Power, 1992; 
Rosemond et al., 2001;  Walters et al., 2005b). Our results, supported by the analysis of vulnerability 
parameters (not shown), suggest that top-down controls are of great importance in both ecosystems. 
In the scenarios reducing the fishing mortalities on high TLs (F≤M, F demersal, F≤0.25 and F ≤FMSY), 
top-down controls resulted in a decrease in the biomass of intermediate trophic levels following the 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
21 
 
high TLs rise in biomass. For instance, fishing at F MSY has a positive impact for demersal species such 
as hake, but at the cost of a decrease of intermediate trophic levels such as horse mackerel. Walters 
et al. (2005a) have shown that applying FMSY (calculated from single-species assessments) at the scale 
of the ecosystem might results in widespread degradation in ecosystem function, and in considerably 
smaller overall yield and value than would be predicted from the sum of corresponding single-species 
yields. This is partly what the model predicted with the F MSY scenario under which total catch and 
total biomass are lower than in the status quo scenario. Thus, biological interaction s may prevent 
achieving current single-species-based thresholds simultaneously for all stocks (Gascuel et al., 201 6; 
Piet and Rice, 2004) . We therefore have to accept that there will be “winners” and losers” in each 
fishing scenario, as Lynam and Mackinson (2015) have shown in the North Sea.  
The F≤0.25 scenario is derived from simulations developed by Worm et al. (2009) demonstrating that 
a low fishing mortality can be considered an appropriate trade -off between conservation and 
exploitation objectives. However, applying the same fishing mortality to all trophic levels is a 
simplistic approach, clearly not optimal in a practical fisheries management perspective and for 
minimising the impact of fishing on ecosystems (Froese et al., 2016). Among the various scenarios we 
tested, m anaging to protect intermediate trophic levels (F  pelagic), demersals’ prey, emerges as a 
possible strategy to maintain forage fish stocks and rebuild the biomass of higher -trophic levels. The 
impact of abundant groups such as mackerel and hor se mackerel on other trophic groups  suggests 
that bottom -up controls also  play a key role in the ecosystem , partly confirming the conclusions 
drawn by Lassalle et al. (2011) for the Bay of Biscay  and by Smith et al. (2011) in a worldwide meta -
analysis.  
It is now recognized that  fleet-based approach is a pathway to implement an effective ecosystem 
approach to fisheries management, especially in European seas (Gascuel et al., 2012; Lynam and 
Mackinson, 2015). Mixed fisheries models are now used routinely to inform manager s on the 
influence of technical interactions on operational implementation of management options calculated 
on a single stock bas is. Also, long -term management plan s are often developed to assess socio -
economic impact s of various management o ptions at the scale of fleets and metier s. Our analysis 
demonstrated that trophic models can also be useful  to examine the direct and indirect 
consequences of  fleet-based management options on ecosystem compartments. Due to a lack of 
data, our results should be considered as preliminary and interpreted qualitative ly rather than 
quantitatively. Nevertheless, the fleet -based scenarios utilized in the Bay of Biscay clearly suggest 
that the highest ecological impacts on fish communities  are caused by the most important fleets in 
terms of landings,  i.e. bottom trawlers and large gillnetters. Here, simulations suggest that trawl  
impacts a large part of the food web  by removing a large range of predators and, through predation 
release, induces an increase of lower trophic levels abundance, eventually leading to large changes in 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
22 
 
all species assemblages. Combining trophic models and model-based indicators to assess  the 
ecological, economic and social performances of the various fleets operating within an ecosystem, 
appears as a key step for the effective implementation of EAFM.  The impacts of bottom trawl ing on 
habitats and associated communities have been well described  (De Groot, 1984; Kaiser et al., 2006; 
Palanques et al., 2001) and would add to the impacts described in the present study. 
 
Conclusion 
In the present study, we showed how trophic models, especially Ecopath with Ecosim as well as 
EcoTroph, are key tools to implement EAFM. In particular, they make it possible to establish 
diagnoses of the exploitation status at the scale of the entire food web.  They provide insights into 
how trends in biomass and catch depend on the fishing impacts , environmental changes  and 
predator-prey interactions. Moreover, Ecosim simulations enable the assessment of the impact of 
every fleet on the food web.   
These models do not replace single -species approaches of stock assessment. However, they can 
complement them and inform the decision-making in fisheries management by testing various fishing 
scenarios to identify “winners” and losers”, which cannot be identified with single-species models. To 
conclude, we suggest that such advice -oriented trophic models should be developed within each 
European marine ecosystem and routinely used in order to monitor ecosystems health and to 
analyse trade -offs between various objectives and scenarios of an ecosystem -based fisheries 
management. 
 
Acknowledgements 
We thank the editors and anonymous referees for their constructive and useful comments.  
  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
23 
 
Supplementary material  
S1 – List of species included in the trophic groups of the Ecopath model 
S2 – Parameters of the Ecopath models (Bay of Biscay and Celtic Sea, 1980 and 2013) 
S3 - Diet information: sources by species 
S4 – Diet matrix (Bay of Biscay and Celtic Sea, 1980) 
S5 – Fit of the Ecosim models (AIC and trends in biomass and catch for the two models) 
 
 
Literature cited 
Ahrens, R.N., Walters, C.J., Christensen, V., 2012. Foraging arena theory. Fish Fish. 13, 41–59. 
Ainsworth, C., Feriss, B., Leblond, E., Guénette, S., 2001. The Bay of Biscay, France: 1998 and 1970 
models. Fish Cent Res Rep 9, 271–313. 
Ainsworth, C.H., Samhouri, J.F., Busch, D.S., Cheung, W.W., Dunne, J., Okey, T.A., 2011. Potential 
impacts of climate change on Northeast Pacifi c marine foodwebs and fisheries. ICES J. Mar. 
Sci. J. Cons. 68, 1217–1229. 
Allen, K.R., 1971. Relation between production and biomass. J. Fish. Board Can. 28, 1573–1581. 
Araújo, J.N., Mackinson, S., Ellis, J.R., Hart, P.J.B., 2005. An ecopath model of the Western English 
Channel ecosystem with an exploration of its dynamic properties.  Science Series Technical 
Report 125, Cefas Lowestoft (UK), 45 p. 
Araújo, J.N., Mackinson, S., Stanford, R.J., Hart, P.J., 2008. Exploring fisheries strategies for the 
western English Channel using an ecosystem model. Ecol. Model. 210, 465–477. 
Araújo, J.N., Mackinson, S., Stanford, R.J., Sims, D.W., Southward, A.J., Hawkins, S.J., Ellis, J.R., Hart, 
P.J., 2006. Modelling food web interactions, variation in plankton production, and fisheries in 
the western English Channel ecosystem. Mar. Ecol.-Prog. Ser.- 309, 175. 
Beattie, A., Sumaila, U.R., Christensen, V., Pauly, D., 2002. A model for the bioeconomic evaluation of 
marine protected area size and placement in the North Sea. Nat.  Resour. Model. 15, 413 –
437. 
Bentorcha, A., 2014 - Modelisation trophique et impact de la pêche dabns l'écosystème du golfe de 
Gascogne et de la mer Celtique. Master thesis, Agrocampus Ouest (Rennes, France), 36 pp.  
Bentorcha, A., Gascuel, D., Guénette, S ., 2017. Using trophic models to assess the impact of fishing 
on marine ecosystems. Application to the Bay of Biscay and C eltic Sea case study. In press in 
Aquatic Living Resources. 
Borja, A., Uriarte, A., Egana, J., Motos, L., Valencia, V., 1998. Relation ships between anchovy 
(Engraulis encrasicolus) recruitment and environment in the Bay of Biscay (1967 –1996). Fish. 
Oceanogr. 7, 375–380. 
Bourdaud, P., Gascuel, D., Bentorcha, A., Brind’Amour, A., 2016. New trophic indicators and target 
values for an ecosystem-based management of fisheries. Ecol. Indic. 61, 588–601. 
Cheung, W.W., Lam, V.W., Sarmiento, J.L., Kearney, K., Watson, R., Pauly, D., 2009. Projecting global 
marine biodiversity impacts under climate change scenarios. Fish Fish. 10, 235–251. 
Christensen, V., Pauly, D., 1992. ECOPATH II —a software for balancing steady -state ecosystem 
models and calculating network characteristics. Ecol. Model. 61, 169–185. 
Christensen, V., Walters, C.J., 2004. Ecopath with Ecosim: methods, capabilities and limitations. Ecol. 
Model. 172, 109–139. 
Christensen, V., Walters, C.J., Pauly, D., 2005. Ecopath with Ecosim: a user’s guide. Fish. Cent. Univ. 
Br. Columbia Vanc. 154. Christensen, V., Walters, C.J., Pauly, D., and Forrest, R. 2008. Ecopath 
with Ecosim version 6 user g uide, Fisheries, Centre, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada. 235 p. (available on www.ecopath.org) 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
24 
 
Coll, M., Akoglu, E., Arreguín -Sánchez, F., Fulton, E.A., Gascuel, D., Heymans, J.J., Libralato, S., 
Mackinson, S., Palomera, I., Piroddi, C., others, 2015. Modelling dynamic ecosystems: 
venturing beyond boundaries with the Ecopath approach. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 25, 413–424. 
Colléter, M., Gascuel, D., Ecoutin, J. -M., Tito de Morais, L., 2012. Modelling trophic flows in 
ecosystems to assess the efficiency of marine protected area (MPA), a case study on the 
coast of Sénégal. Ecol. Model. 232, 1–13.  
Colléter, M., Guitton, J., Gascuel, D., 2013. An introduction to the EcoTroph R Package: analyzing 
aquatic ecosystem trophic networks. R J. 5, 98–107. 
Colléter, M., Valls, A., Guitton, J., Gascuel, D., Pauly, D., Christensen, V., 2015 b. Global overview of 
the applications of the Ecopath with Ecosim modeling approach using the EcoBase models 
repository. Ecol. Model. 302, 42–53. 
Colléter, M., Walters, C.J., Gatti, P., Gascuel, D., 2015 a. Including foraging arena and top -down 
controls improves the modeling of trophic flows and fishing impacts in aquatic food webs. 
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 534, 17–37. 
Collie, J.S., Gislason, H., 2001. Biological reference points for fish stocks in a multispecies context. 
Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 58, 2167–2176. 
Cornou, A.S., Diméet, J., Té tard, A., Gaudou, O., Quinio -Scavinner, M., Fauconnet, L., Dubé, B., 
Rochet, M. -J., 2015. Observations à bord des navires de pêche professionnelle. Bilan de 
l’échantillonnage 2013 (working paper, mineo). 
Cury, P.M., Shannon, L.J., Roux, J.P., Daskalov, G.M ., Jarre, A., Moloney, C.L., Pauly, D., 2005. 
Trophodynamic indicators for an ecosystem approach to fisheries. ICES J. Mar. Sci. J. Cons. 
62, 430–442. 
Daskalov, G.M., Grishin, A.N., Rodionov, S., Mihneva, V., 2007. Trophic cascades triggered by 
overfishing reveal possible mechanisms of ecosystem regime shifts. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 104, 
10518–10523. 
De Groot, S.J., 1984. The impact of bottom trawling on benthic fauna of the North Sea. Ocean 
Manag. 9, 177–190. 
Essington, T.E., Beaudreau, A.H., Wiedenmann, J ., 2006. Fishing through marine food webs. Proc. 
Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 103, 3171–3175. 
European Commission, 2008. Directive 2008/56/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 
establishing a framework for community action in the field of marine en vironmental policy 
(Marine Strategy Framework Directive) Off. J. Eur. Union, L164 (2008), pp. 19–40. 
FAO, 2003. The Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries No. 4 Suppl. 2. Rome, Italy. FAO. 112pp. 
Froese, R., Winke r, H., Gascuel, D., Sumalia, U.R., Pauly, D., 2016. Minimizing the impact of fishing. 
Fish and Fish. 17, 785–802. 
Fulton, E.A., Smith, A.D., Johnson, C.R., 2003. Effect of complexity on marine ecosystem models. 
Garcia, S.M., 2003. The ecosystem approach  to fisheries: issues, terminology, principles, institutional 
foundations, implementation and outlook. FAO Technical paper 443, Romme (Italie). 
Garcia, S.M., Cochrane, K.L., 2005. Ecosystem approach to fisheries: a review of implementation 
guidelines. ICES J. Mar. Sci. J. Cons. 62, 311–318. 
Gasche, L., Gascuel, D., 2013. EcoTroph: a simple model to assess fishery interactions and their 
impacts on ecosystems. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 70, 498–510.  
Gasche, L., Gascuel, D., Shannon, L., Shin, Y.-J., 2012. Global assessment of the fishing impacts on the 
Southern Benguela ecosystem using an EcoTroph modelling approach. J. Mar. Syst. 90, 1–12. 
Gascuel, D., 2005. The trophic-level based model: a theoretical approach of fishing effects on marine 
ecosystems. Ecol. Model. 189, 315–332. 
Gascuel D., Bez N., Forest A., Guillotreau P., Laloé F., Lobry J., Mahévas S., Mesnil B., Rivot E., 
Rochette S., Trenkel V., 2011 - A Future for marine Fisheries in Europe (Manifesto of the 
Association Française d'Halieumétrie). Fisheries Research, 109: 1-6. 
Gascuel, D., Coll, M., Fox, C., Guénette, S., Guitton, J., Kenny, A., Knittweis, L., Nielsen, J.R., Piet, G., 
Raid, T., Traver s-Trolet, M., Shephard, S., 2016 . Fishing impact and environmental status in 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
25 
 
European seas: a diagnosis from stock assessments and ecosystem indicators. Fish and Fish. 
17, 31–55. 
Gascuel, D., Gu énette, S., Pauly, D., 2011. The trophic -level-based ecosystem modelling approach: 
theoretical overview and practical uses. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68, 1403–1416.  
Gascuel, D., Merino, G., Döring, R., Druon, J.N., Goti, L., Gu énette, S., Macher, C., Soma, K., Travers -
Trolet, M., Mackinson, S., 2012. Towards the implementation of an integrated ecosystem 
fleet-based management of European fisheries. Mar. Policy 36, 1022–1032. 
Gascuel, D., Pauly, D., 2009. EcoTroph: modelling marine ecosystem functioning and impact of 
fishing. Ecol. Model. 220, 2885–2898. 
Guénette, S., Gascuel, D., 2012. Shifting baselines in European fisheries: The case of the Celtic Sea 
and Bay of Biscay. Ocean Coast. Manag. 70, 10–21.  
Guénette, S., Gascuel, D., 2009. Considering both fishing and climate in a model of the Celtic Sea and 
the Bay of Biscay: what do we learn? ICES CM 2009 / F:07, 7 p.. 
Guénette, S., Meissa, B., Gascuel, D., 2014. Assessing the contrib ution of marine protected areas to 
the trophic functioning of ecosystems: a model for the Banc d’Arguin and the Mauritanian 
shelf. PloS One 9, e94742. 
Halouani, G., Gascuel, D., Hattab, T., Lasram, F.B.R., Coll, M., Tsagarakis, K., Piroddi, C., Romdhane, 
M.S., Le Loc’h, F., 2015. Fishing impact in Mediterranean ecosystems: an EcoTroph modelling 
approach. J. Mar. Syst. 150, 22-33.   
Heymans, J.J., Coll, M., Link, J.S., Mackinson, S., Steenbeek, J., Walters, C., Christensen, V., 2016. Best 
practice in Ecopath  with Ecosim food -web models for ecosystem -based management. Ecol. 
Model. 331, 173–184. 
Hiddink, J.G., Jennings, S., Kaiser, M.J., Queirós, A.M., Duplisea, D.E., Piet, G.J., 2006. Cumulative 
impacts of seabed trawl disturbance on benthic biomass, production, and species richness in 
different habitats. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 63, 721–736. 
Hoenig, J., M., 1983. Empirical use of longevity data to estimate mortality rates. Fish. Bull. 82, 898 –
903. 
ICES, 1997. Report of the Study Group on the Precautionary Approach to Fisheries Management. ICES 
CM 1997/Assess 7, 41 pp. 
Jennings, S., 2005. Indicators to support an ecosystem approach to fisheries. Fish Fish. 6, 212–232. 
Klyashtorin, L.B., 1998. Long -term climat e change and main commercial fish production in the 
Atlantic and Pacific. Fish. Res. 37, 115–125. 
Koutsikopoulos, C., Le Cann, B., 1996. Physical processes and hydrological structures related to the 
Bay of Biscay anchovy. Sci. Mar. 60, 9–19. 
Lassalle, G., Gascuel, D., Le Loc’h, F., Lobry, J., Pierce, G.J., Ridoux, V., Santos, M.B., Spitz, J., Niquil, N., 
2012. An ecosystem approach for the assessment of fisheries impacts on marine top 
predators: the Bay of Biscay case study. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 69, 925–938. 
Lassalle, G., Lobry, J., Le Loc’H, F., Bustamante, P., Certain, G., Delmas, D., Dupuy, C., Hily, C., Labry, 
C., Le Pape, O., Marquis, E., Petigas, P., Pusineri, C., Ridoux, V., Spitz, J., Niquil, N., 2011. 
Lower trophic levels and detrital biomass control the Bay of Biscay continental shelf food 
web: implications for ecosystem management. Prog. Oceanogr. 91, 561–575. 
Lauria, V., 2012. Impacts of climate change and fisheries on the Celtic Sea ecosystem. PhD thesis, 
Plymouth University, School of Science and Technology, Faculty of Marine Science and 
Engineering (UK). 248 p. 
Lees, K., Mackinson, S., 2007. An Ecopath model of the Irish Sea: ecosystems properties and 
sensitivity analysis. Cefas Sci. Ser. Tech. Rep. 138, 49. 
Link, J.S., 2010. Adding rigor to ecological network models by evaluating a set of pre -balance 
diagnostics: a plea for PREBAL. Ecol. Model. 221, 1580–1591. 
Lynam, C.P., Mackinson, S., 2015. How will fisheries management measures contribute towards the 
attainment of Good Environmental Status for the North Sea ecosystem? Glob. Ecol. Conserv. 
4, 160–175. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
26 
 
MacCall, A.D., 2009. Depletion -corrected average catch: a simple formula for estimating sustainable 
yields in data-poor situations. ICES J. Mar. Sci. J. Cons. 66, 2267–2271. 
Mackinson, S., Daskalov, G., 2008. Science Series Technical Report no. 142, Cefas Lowestoft (UK). 196 
p. 
Mesnil, B., 2008. Public-aided crises in the French fishing sector. Ocean Coast. Manag. 51, 689–700.  
Olsen, E.M., Heino, M., Lilly, G.R., Morgan, M.J., Brattey, J., Ern ande, B., Dieckmann, U., 2004. 
Maturation trends indicative of rapid evolution preceded the collapse of northern cod. 
Nature 428, 932–935. 
Palanques, A., Guillén, J., Puig, P., 2001. Impact of bottom trawling on water turbidity and muddy 
sediment of an unfished continental shelf. Limnol. Oceanogr. 46, 1100–1110. 
Palomares, M.L.D., Pauly, D., 1998. Predicting food consumption of fish populations as functions of 
mortality, food type, morphometrics, temperature and salinity. Mar. Freshw. Res. 49, 447 –
453. 
Patterson, K., 1992. Fisheries for small pelagic species: an empirical approach to management 
targets. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 2, 321–338. 
Pauly, D., 1995. Anecdotes and the shifting baseline syndrome of fisheries. Trends Ecol. Evol. 10, 430. 
Pauly, D., 1980. On  the interrelationships between natural mortality, growth parameters, and mean 
environmental temperature in 175 fish stocks. J. Cons. 39, 175–192. 
Pauly, D., Christensen, V., 1995. Primary production required to sustain global fisheries. Nature 374, 
255–257. 
Pauly, D., Christensen, V., Dalsgaard, J., Froese, R., Torres, F., 1998. Fishing down marine food webs. 
Science 279, 860–863. 
Pauly, D., Christensen, V., Walters, C., 2000. Ecopath, Ecosim, and Ecospace as tools for evaluating 
ecosystem impact of fisheries. ICES J. Mar. Sci. J. Cons. 57, 697–706. 
Pauly, D., Watson, R., 2005. Background and interpretation of the “Marine Trophic Index”as a 
measure of biodiversity. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 360, 415–423. 
Pereira, H.M., Leadley, P.W., Proença, V., Alkemade, R., Scharlemann, J.P., Fernandez-Manjarrés, J.F., 
Araújo, M.B., Balvanera, P., Biggs, R., Cheung, W.W., others, 2010. Scenarios for global 
biodiversity in the 21st century. Science 330, 1496–1501. 
Piet, G.J., Rice, J.C., 2004. Performance of prec autionary reference points in providing management 
advice on North Sea fish stocks. ICES J. Mar. Sci. J. Cons. 61, 1305–1312. 
Pingree, R.D., Mardell, G.T., Cartwright, D.E., 1981. Slope turbulence, internal waves and 
phytoplankton growth at the Celtic Sea shelf-break [and discussion]. Philos. Trans. R. Soc. 
Lond. Math. Phys. Eng. Sci. 302, 663–682. 
Pinnegar, J.K., Jennings, S., O’brien, C.M., Polunin, N.V.C., 2002. Long -term changes in the trophic 
level of the Celtic Sea fish community and fish market price  distribution. J. Appl. Ecol. 39, 
377–390. 
Plagányi, É.E., 2007. Models for an ecosystem approach to fisheries. Food & Agriculture Org. 
Planque, B., Lazure, P., Jégou, A. -M., 2004. Detecting hydrological landscapes over the Bay of Biscay 
continental shelf in spring. Clim. Res. 28, 41–52. 
Polovina, J.J., 1984. Model of a coral reef ecosystem. Coral Reefs 3, 1–11. 
Power, M.E., 1992. Top -down and bottom -up forces in food webs: do plants have primacy. Ecology 
73, 733–746. 
Prato G., Barrier C., Francour P., Capp anera V., Markantonatou V., Guidetti P., Mangialajo, L. 
Cattanea-Vietti., Gascuel D., in press. – Assessing the interacting impacts of artisanal and 
recreational fisheries in a small MPA (Portofino, NW Mediterranean). Ecosphere. 
Rochet, M., Trenkel, V., Be llail, R., Coppin, F., Lepape, O., Mahe, J., Morin, J., Poulard, J., Schlaich, I., 
Souplet, A., 2005. Combining indicator trends to assess ongoing changes in exploited fish 
communities: diagnostic of communities off the coasts of France. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62, 1647–
1664.  
Rosemond, A.D., Pringle, C.M., Ramírez, A., Paul, M.J., 2001. A test of top -down and bottom -up 
control in a detritus-based food web. Ecology 82, 2279–2293. 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
27 
 
Sánchez, F., Olaso, I., 2004. Effects of fisheries on the Cantabrian Sea shelf ecosy stem. Ecol. Model. 
172, 151–174. 
Shannon, L.J., Coll, M., Bundy, A., Gascuel, D., Heymans, J.J., Kleisner, K., Lynam, C., Piroddi, C., Tam, 
J., Travers, M. and Shin, Y. -J., 2014. Trophic level -based indicators to track fishing impacts 
across marine ecosystems. Marine Ecology Progress Series 512: 115–140. 
Smith, A.D.M., Brown, C.J., Bulman, C.M., Fulton, E.A., Johnson, P., Kaplan, I.C., Lozano -Montes, H., 
Mackinson, S., Marzl off, M., Shannon, L.J., Shin, Y. -J., Tam, J. 2011. Impacts of fishing low -
trophic level species on marine ecosystems. Science 333: 1147-1150. 
STECF, 2012. Scientific, Technical and Economic Committee for Fi sheries. Development of the 
Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries Management (EAFM) in European seas (STECF -11-13), 
Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg. EUR – Scientific and Technical 
Research series, ISSN 1831-9424 (online), ISSN 1018-5593 (print), 178 pp. 
Steinmetz, F., Thébaud, O., Blanchard, F., Le Floch, P., Bihel, J., 2008. A bio-economic analysis of long 
term changes in the production of French fishing fleets operating in the Bay of Biscay. Aquat. 
Living Resour. 21, 317–327. 
Tremblay-Boyer, L., Gascuel, D., Watson, R., Christensen, V., Pauly, D., 2011. Modelling the effects of 
fishing on the biomass of the world’s oceans from 1950 to 2006. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 442, 
169–185. 
Valls, A., Gascuel, D., Guénette, S., Francour, P., 2012. Modeling trophic interactions to assess the 
effects of a marine protected area: case study in the NW Mediterranean Sea. Mar. Ecol. Prog. 
Ser. 456, 98. 
Varela, M., 1996. Phytoplankton ecology in the Bay of Biscay. Sci. Mar. 60, 45–53. 
Walters, C., Christensen, V., Pauly, D., 1997. Structuring dynamic models of exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balance assessments. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 7, 139–172. 
Walters, C., Kitchell, J.F., 2001. Cultivation/depensation effects on juvenile survival and recruitment: 
implications for the theory of fishing. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 58, 39–50. 
Walters, C., Pauly, D., Christensen, V., Kitchell, J.F., 2000. Representing density dependent 
consequences of life history strategies in aquatic ecosystems: EcoSim II. Ecosystems 3, 70 –
83. 
Walters, C.J., Christensen, V., Martell, S.J., Kitchell, J.F., 2005a. Possible ecosystem impacts of 
applying MSY policies from single-species assessment. ICES J. Mar. Sci. J. Cons. 62, 558–568. 
Walters, C.J., Christensen, V., Martell, S.J., Kitchell, J .F., 2005b. Possible ecosystem impacts of 
applying MSY policies from single-species assessment. ICES J. Mar. Sci. J. Cons. 62, 558–568. 
Walters, C.J., Martell, S.J., 2004. Fisheries ecology and management. Princeton University Press. 
Worm, B., Barbier, E.B ., Beaumont, N., Duffy, J.E., Folke, C., Halpern, B.S., Jackson, J.B., Lotze, H.K., 
Micheli, F., Palumbi, S.R., others, 2006. Impacts of biodiversity loss on ocean ecosystem 
services. science 314, 787–790. 
Worm, B., Hilborn, R., Baum, J.K., Branch, T.A., C ollie, J.S., Costello, C., Fogarty, M.J., Fulton, E.A., 
Hutchings, J.A., Jennings, S., others, 2009. Rebuilding global fisheries. science 325, 578–585. 
  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
28 
 
Table 1 - Functional groups, and data sources used to build Ecopath models, and time series used in 
fitting Ecosim, in the Celtic Sea (CS) and the Bay of Biscay (BB) ecosystems. 
Number of 
groups Group types 
ECOPATH  ECOSIM time series 
Biomass Catches  Biomass Catches Fishing 
mortality 
2 Marine mammals Literature 0  n.a. 0 0 
2 Seabirds Surveys 0  n.a. 0 0 
  7 (BB) 
14 (CS) 
Fully assessed stocks : hake (juv+ad), sole, 
mackerel, horse mackerel, anchovy, sardine, 
seabass(CS), cod (CS, juv+ad), haddock (CS), 
whiting (CS), boarfish (CS), plaice (CS) 
ICES 
working 
group 
ICES 
working 
group 
 
ICES 
working 
group 
ICES 
working 
group 
ICES 
working 
group 
11 (BB) 
  4 (CS) 
Partially assessed groups : anglerfish, blue 
whiting, megrim, Norway lobster (CS), rays 
(BB), seabass (BB),  demersal L, M & S (BB), 
pouts (BB), cephalopods (BB) 
Estimated 
according 
to survey 
data 
ICES & 
Statlant 
database 
 EVHOE 
survey 
Statlant 
database 
ICES  (4 
goups 
only) 
  7 (BB) 
12 (CS) 
Other exploited groups: sharks L, pelagic L & 
M, crabs, shrimps, whiting (BB), plaice (BB), 
rays (CS), demersal L, M & S (CS), sprat (CS), 
pouts (CS), cephalopods (CS) 
Estimated 
by the 
model 
ICES & 
Statlant 
database 
 n.a. Statlant 
database n.a. 
5 Other benthic invertebrates 
Estimated 
by the 
model 
0 or 
Statlant 
(molluscs) 
 -- 
3 Zooplankton 
Estimated 
by the 
model 
0  -- 
3 Primary producers 
Estimated 
according 
to SeaWifs 
data  
0 or 
Stadland 
(algae) 
 -- 
3 Bacteria, Detritus and Discards 
Literature 
or  
estimated 
by the 
model 
0  -- 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
29 
 
Table 2 - Fishing scenarios 2014-2030 simulated in the Bay of Biscay with Ecosim 
Scenario Observations Sources 
F = status 
quo 
Fishing mortality maintained at its 2013 
level for all fished groups (baseline 
scenario) 
 
F ≤ FMSY 
Blue whiting, sole, horse mackerel, 
mackerel and hake harvested at Fs set to 
achieve Maximum Sustainable Yield (MSY). 
All other species harvested at F status quo 
(Fsq lower than FMSY or FMSY unknown). 
FMSY  are taken from ICES single species 
assessments and advice (ICES, 2013). 
F ≤ 0.25 
F = 0.25 for all exploited groups whose F2013 
> 0.25. This concerned sole, hake, megrim, 
anglerfish and Norway lobster. All other 
species harvested at F status quo. 
According to Worm et al. (2009), reducing 
exploitation rates (here F = Y/B) to 0.25 is 
predicted to rebuild total biomass, increase 
average body size and strongly reduce species 
collapses with little loss in long-term yield. 
F ≤ M 
F = Natural mortality (M) for all groups for 
which F2013 is higher than the corresponding 
natural mortality. All other species 
harvested at F status quo. 
M has long been used in fisheries science as a 
proxy for the upper limit of the instantaneous rate 
of sustainable fishing mortality FMSY (Froese et al., 
2016; MacCall, 2009). 
F 
demersal   
F = 0.8 x M for all demersal groups for 
which F2013 is higher than this threshold 
value. All other species harvested at F 
status quo. 
Threshold of fishing mortality recommended by 
Walters and Martell (2004) for demersal species. 
F pelagic 
F = 0.6 x M for all pelagic groups for which 
F2013 is higher than this threshold value. All 
other species harvested at F status quo. 
According to Patterson (1992), pelagic stocks 
appeared to be in equilibrium for an exploitation 
rate F/Z=0.4, which may be used as a guideline for 
the appropriate exploitation of pelagic stocks. 
  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
30 
 
Table 3 - Values of ecological indicators in 2030 for the six fishing scenarios simulated in the Bay of 
Biscay (see table 2). Mean trophic level of the ecosystem biomass (MTLB), marine trophic index (MTI), 
high trophic level indicator (HTI), apex predator indicator (API), total biomass and catches , primary 
production required to sustain fisheries (PPR, in % of the primary production), and mean trophic level 
of the catch (MTLY)  
 Status quo F=FMSY F≤0.25 F≤M F demersal F pelagic 
MTLB 2.39 2.39 2.39 2.39 2.38 2.39 
MTI 3.70 3.71 3.71 3.71 3.73 3.70 
HTI (%) 2.7 2.8 2.8 2.8 2.9 2.7 
API (%) 21.4 22.6 22.8 22.8 24.6 20.9 
Total biomass (t/km²) 89.2 88.8 88.8 88.9 88.5 89.4 
Total catch (t/km²) 1.36 1.29 1.26 1.26 1.19 1.35 
PPR 10.1 9.1 9.0 9.1 8.1 10.2 
MTLY 3.74 3.72 3.72 3.73 3.70 3.74 
  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
31 
 
Figure captions 
Figure 1 - Map of the continental shelves (hatched area) of the Celtic Sea (ICES divisions VIIe -
j) and the Bay of Biscay (ICES divisions VIIIab). 
Figure 2 - Trophic spectra of biomass (B), accessible biomass (B*), catches, fishing mortalities 
(F) and accessible fishing losses ( *) in the Bay of Biscay (grey) and the Celtic Sea 
(black) in 2013. 
Figure 3 - Changes in trophic spectra derived from Ecopath models, between 1980 (dotted 
line) and 2013 (solid line), for the Bay of Biscay (left) and the Celtic Sea (right). Top: 
biomass (t/km²) in log scale. Middle: fishing mortalities (year -1). Bottom: c atches 
(t/km²/year). 
Figure 4 - Indicators of the exploitation status of ecosystems  obtained using E coTroph 
simulations: fishing mortality multipliers mF 0.1 and mFMSY per trophic level in the Bay 
of Biscay (left) and the Celtic Sea (right), in 1980 (top) and 2013 (bottom). 
Figure 5 - Changes over the 1980 to 2013 period for: relative biomass (standardized to the 
1980 value), observed and predicted (from Ecosim) catches,  and fishing mortalities , 
for demersal fish, pelagic fish and miscellaneous invertebrates  (such as cephalopods, 
Norway lobster or benthic invertebrates). 
Figure 6 - Biomass ratio per trophic class (2030 simulated / 2030 status quo) according to 5 
fishing management scenarios run with Ecosim (see table 3) 
Figure 7 – Impact of the French fishing fleets operating in the Bay of Biscay: biomass ratio 
per trophic class (2030 simulated  / 2030 statu s quo ) resulting from the removal of 
each fleet.  
  
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
32 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 .  
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
33 
 
  
  
Figure 2.  
 
0.01
0.1
1
10
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Biomass (t.km-²) 
B Celtic Sea
B Bay of Biscay
B* Celtic Sea
B* Bay of Biscay
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Catches (t.km-² year-1) 
Y Celtic Sea
Y Bay of
Biscay
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Fishing mortality (year-1) 
Trophic level 
F Celtic Sea
F Bay of Biscay
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0.60
0.70
0.80
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
Access. fishing loss (TL-1) 
Trophic level 
φ* Celtic Sea 
φ* Bay of Biscay 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
34 
 
                Bay of Biscay                         Celtic Sea 
biomass (t/km²) 
  
catches (t/km²/year) 
  
Fishing mortality (year-1) 
  
 Trophic level Trophic level 
  
Figure 3.  
 
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
35 
 
 
Figure 4.  
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
36 
 
                   Bay of Biscay Celtic Sea 
Relative biomass 
   
Observ. catch (t/km²/year) 
 
  
Simulat. catch (t/km²/year) 
   
Fishing mortality 
 
  
 Years Years 
  
 
Figure 5.  
 
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
37 
 
 
Figure 6.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.   
  
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
B 2030 simulated / B 2030 statu quo 
Trophic level 
F≤M 
F pelagic
F demersal
F≤Fmsy 
F≤0.25 
0.9
0.95
1
1.05
1.1
2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5
B 2030 simulated / B 2030 status quo 
Trophic level 
Bottom trawlers
Pelagic trawlers
Gillnetters (<15m)
Gillneters (>15m)
Longliners-hangliners
Nephrops trawlers
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT