fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 28 August 2020
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2020.00707
Edited by:
Prateep Kumar Nayak,
University of Waterloo, Canada
Reviewed by:
Jenia Mukherjee,
Indian Institute of Technology
Kharagpur, India
Sherman Farhad,
Brock University, Canada
Lynne Jane Shannon,
University of Cape Town, South Africa
*Correspondence:
Viola Alms
viola.alms@leibniz-zmt.de
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Marine Ecosystem Ecology,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Marine Science
Received: 21 March 2020
Accepted: 03 August 2020
Published: 28 August 2020
Citation:
Alms V and Wolff M (2020)
Identiﬁcation of Drivers of Change
of the Gulf of Nicoya Ecosystem
(Costa Rica). Front. Mar. Sci. 7:707.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2020.00707
Identiﬁcation of Drivers of Change of
the Gulf of Nicoya Ecosystem (Costa
Rica)
Viola Alms 1,2* and Matthias Wolff 1
1 Leibniz Centre for Tropical Marine Research, Department of Theoretical Ecology and Modelling, Bremen, Germany,
2 University of Bremen, Bremen, Germany
The Gulf of Nicoya is a large tropical estuary located on the Paciﬁc coast of Costa
Rica and accounts for the country’s main ﬁsh production. It is increasingly impacted
not only by its ﬁsheries, but also by urbanization, tourism developments, the input
of pollutants from urban centers and agriculture activities in the catchment areas of
large rivers entering the gulf. Similar to other coastal ecosystems, the gulf is particularly
sensitive to short- and long-term changes in the climate, such as the precipitation rate,
Sea Surface Temperature, wind speed and current regimes. While the gulf has been
studied for decades, until now no attempt has been made to combine the analysis of the
impacts of ﬁshing and environmental changes on the ecosystem. By following a holistic
approach that uses ﬁsheries and environmental time series data from collaborative
research and simulation models, this study aims at identifying the main drivers of
the observed changes in the Gulf of Nicoya ecosystem. While the model simulations
indicate that variations in the catch of some target species (e.g., cephalopods and
shrimps) are mainly driven by the ﬁsheries’ exploitation rates, several other species
(e.g., corvina, snook, small pelagics, and crabs) are also substantially affected by
climate variations, particularly during El Niño periods of high Sea Surface Temperature
extremes and increased precipitation. During these periods, phytoplankton productivity
and zooplankton biomass deceases with bottom–up effects on the entire food chain.
Indicators of the environmental state of the system thus have to be considered along
with regulations of the ﬁshing pressure to form the basis for the development of
appropriate management strategies.
Keywords: ecosystem modeling, ﬁsheries management, climate variability, ecopath with ecosim, trophic
interaction
INTRODUCTION
Ecosystem food webs change over time either due to changes in natural predator-prey interactions,
resource limitations and anthropogenic inﬂuences, or due to environmental inﬂuences that cause
changes in the distribution, growth performance or survival rate of the species. Fishing as a
major anthropogenic impact factor additionally greatly aﬀects the population size of target species,
their prey and predators and may even damage the species habitats (Jennings and Kaiser, 1998;
Frederiksen et al., 2006). Although overﬁshing is known to have caused the decline and collapse
of many ﬁsh stocks around the world, it can also alter the sensitivity of the ecosystem to natural
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 1 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 2
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
environmental variations and reduce the ability to buﬀer the
eﬀects of extreme natural events or future climate change
(Hidalgo et al., 2011). At the same time, the limits overﬁshing
of sustainability critical threshold for ﬁshing can be aﬀected
by environmental changes (Neira et al., 2009). Fishing induced
changes in the biomass that occur at one trophic level aﬀect the
trophic levels above and below that level, causing trophic cascades
throughout the system (e.g., Duarte and Garcıa, 2004; Andersen
and Pedersen, 2009). Ecosystems are driven by the combined
eﬀect of varied inﬂuencing factors, that have to be identiﬁed
and examined to understand the dynamics of the system. To
assess the particular role of small-scale and industrial ﬁsheries
within the ecosystem multiple factors need to be evaluated.
The historical development of the operating ﬁshing ﬂeets, the
diﬀerent gear types and target species, as well as the temporal
distribution of the ﬁshing eﬀort are all important factors that
need to be considered for a holistic assessment of the Gulf of
Nicoya ecosystem and its changes over time. We assume that
the historical and ongoing removal of large numbers of small
pelagic species and the existence of a variety of small demersal
species should have most likely shaped the ecosystem over the
last decades (Alms and Wolﬀ, 2019). This process, together with
the ﬁsheries-induced substantial reduction of shrimp biomass
over the last two decades, might be particularly relevant since
it may have greatly reduced system biomass and productivity
in low and mid trophic levels, reducing the energy basis for
higher trophic levels of the gulf (Duarte and Garcıa, 2004).
Our previous research on the Gulf of Nicoya ecosystem (Wolﬀ
et al., 1998; Alms and Wolﬀ, 2019) allowed us to describe the
energy ﬂow structure and biomass changes that have occurred
in the system over a period of two decades. We attributed an
important role in causing these changes to ﬁsheries and were
able to show that phytoplankton and zooplankton largely control
higher trophic levels groups, such as benthos, shrimps, and small
pelagic ﬁshes, suggesting that bottomñup control mechanisms are
crucial to the system.
Since in such environments changes in abiotic factors due to
climate variations may directly aﬀect the primary productivity,
we further examine these bottomñup eﬀects in this study.
Additionally, we aim at exploring the possibility of mixed
trophic interactions or wasp-waist control mechanisms within
intermediate trophic level species that exercise both bottomñup
control on their predators and topñdown control on their prey
(Cury et al., 2000).
According to the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO),
most inter-annual ﬂuctuations in ﬁsh production in the Eastern
Central Paciﬁc Ocean (Fishing Area 77) result from abundance
changes in mid-trophic level pelagic ﬁsh. These ﬁsh often assume
a central role in marine ecosystems and inﬂuence both higher and
lower trophic levels (Frederiksen et al., 2006). Duarte and Garcıa
(2004), however, point out that this “wasp-waist” role of small
pelagic ﬁsh that has been proven for temperate and subtropical
upwelling regions may not remain valid for tropical and therefore
less productive upwelling areas, a statement we would like to
analyze for the Gulf of Nicoya.
Previous studies prove that the El Niño-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO) cycle occurring in the Eastern Tropical Paciﬁc Ocean
(ETP) causes periodic variations in several environmental
parameters, which temporarily change the coastal marine
environment and its species composition (Fiedler, 2002; Tam
et al., 2008; Taylor et al., 2008b; Wolﬀ et al., 2012). In the
southern Humboldt and southern Benguela upwelling systems,
environmental variations and trophic interactions were found
to be more important than the ﬁsheries in causing variations in
species abundance (Shannon et al., 2008). Atmospheric pressure
and Sea Surface Temperature (SST) are the main indicators of El
Niño events (National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration,
2020a), although rain fall, wind and current patterns may also
change dramatically (Wolﬀ, 2010). On average, the atmospheric
pressure is low in the Western Tropical Paciﬁc and relatively
high in the Eastern Tropical Paciﬁc. Here, sea level Sea
Surface Temperature (SST) greatly rises during El Nino events,
concurrently with changes in other climatic parameters, such as
wind direction, wind speed and precipitation rates (Ji et al., 2015).
In the entire ETP region, climate impacts of the ENSO cycle
are perceptible and in Costa Rica, strong eﬀects of the ENSO
cycle have been observed in the Gulf of Nicoya as well as in the
Golfo Dulce, the second important gulf system of the Costa Rican
Paciﬁc coast (Quesada-Alpízar and Morales-Ramírez, 2004).
During the particularly strong El Niño phase in 1997/98, as
well as during the ENSO phase in 2009, changes in the structure
of the phytoplankton and zooplankton communities have been
observed (Brugnoli-Olivera and Morales-Ramírez, 2008). The
phytoplankton and primary productivity decreased in these years
and lower densities of diatoms and dinoﬂagellates were reported
in the Gulf of Nicoya (Brugnoli-Olivera and Morales-Ramírez,
2008; Calvo Vargas et al., 2014). This reduction of low trophic
level biomass and productivity is then usually followed by a
reduction in biomass of plankton, ﬁsh and seabirds, leading to
severe consequences for the regional ﬁshing sector and coastal
communities (Lizano and Alfaro, 2004; Wolﬀ et al., 2012) as their
catch of pelagic species, coastal demersal species, shrimp, squid
and other marine organisms (FAO) is aﬀected. For an eﬀective
implementation of an ecosystem-based ﬁsheries management
in the region it is crucial to understand the response of the
ecosystem to diﬀerent ﬁsheries in place and to the environmental
drivers as a whole. This is based on the understanding of the
biomass ﬂows through the food web, starting at the lowest
trophic level (Brugnoli-Olivera and Morales-Ramírez, 2008;
Tam et al., 2008).
Accordingly, we used a routine adapted to speciﬁc time series
using ﬁsheries and environmental data for a period from 1995
to 2014 to elucidate the role of the ﬁshing eﬀort and abiotic
factors in explaining observed changes. For this purpose, we
used the open-source software Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE)
and applied a hypothesis-based model ﬁtting procedure, for
which we considered time series of both inter-annual changes
in ﬁshing eﬀort and ﬂeet composition as well as the most
relevant environmental factors (Sea Level Pressure, Sea Surface
Temperature, Chlorophyll-a concentrations, wind direction and
speed, precipitation rates, particulate inorganic and organic
carbon concentrations and photosynthetically active radiation).
A central question examined in our study is whether the observed
system changes were driven by the exploitation patterns of
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 2 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 3
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
ﬁsheries or/and by environmental changes. The basis for this
analysis was provided by two EwE “snapshot models” of the Gulf
of Nicoya ecosystem for the years 1995 (Wolﬀ et al., 1998) and
2015 (Alms and Wolﬀ, 2019). We consider the identiﬁcation of
main drivers behind the observed changes as crucial requisites
for the selection of appropriate management and conservation
strategies of the gulf. Therefore, on the basis of the present
research, future measures can be taken to sustainably improve the
habitat of the Gulf of Nicoya.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
Description of the Study Site
The Gulf of Nicoya (10◦N, 85◦W) is an estuary inﬂuenced by the
tides on the northwest Paciﬁc coast of Costa Rica ( Figure 1). The
mangrove-fringed gulf extends from the mouth of the Tempisque
River to the Paciﬁc Ocean, with an area of 1530 km 2. It is
of considerable ecological importance due to its function as a
feeding, reproduction and nursing site for many species, such
as shrimps, sharks, small pelagic ﬁsh and seabirds. Due to its
high productivity, the estuary is the country’s principal ﬁshing
ground for the artisanal ﬁshing ﬂeet on the one hand (Vargas,
1995) and for the semi-industrial ﬁshing ﬂeets on the other
hand. In the inner shallow part of the Gulf of Nicoya, the small-
scale artisanal ﬁshing sector is of major economic and social
importance (Trujillo et al., 2012; Lozano and Heinen, 2016).
More than 20 coastal communities around the Gulf of Nicoya
depend on the artisanal ﬁshing sector, with rare options for
alternative livelihoods (Proyecto Golfos, 2013).
Fisheries and Time-Series Data Used
The Gulf of Nicoya is the country’s main ﬁshing ground. The
present research is based on ﬁsheries data of the artisanal and
semi-industrial ﬁshing sector.
Four artisanal ﬁshing ﬂeets with approximately 2000
licensed ﬁshermen operate in the gulf with diﬀerent boat
sizes and gear types that target a variety of demersal and
coastal species (BIOMARCC-SINAC-GIZ, 2013). Gillnets are
prominently used and its usage further increased in the 2010s
(Sánchez-Jiménez et al., 2019). Fishermen use small motorized
boats (pangas). Catches are diverse but dominated by drums
(Perciformes: Sciaenidae), catﬁshes (Siluriformes: Ariidae),
snooks (Perciformes:Centropomidae), and diﬀerent penaeid
shrimp species. The line ﬂeet uses bottom longlines and drifting
longlines and operate bigger motorized boats (lanchas). Target
species are sharks, barracuda, comber and others. Smaller
non-motorized boats ﬁsh for drums, croakers and snook, using
handlines in the inner shallow part of the gulf. Manual mollusk
extraction is mostly carried out by the women of the coastal
communities, combined with the manual trap ﬁsheries targeting
diﬀerent crustaceans. The artisanal ﬂeet provides around 55% of
the total catch in the Gulf of Nicoya (in 2013).
Additionally, two semi-industrial ﬁshing ﬂeets operate in the
gulf: shrimp trawlers and sardine purse-seiners. The purse seine
vessels target small pelagic ﬁsh species in the intermediate and
outer zones of the Gulf of Nicoya. The bottom trawl ﬂeet targets
several shrimp species, mostly in the outer gulf, however the
capture of bycatch species drastically exceeds the shrimp catches.
Artisanal ﬁsheries landing data of the Gulf of Nicoya on the
one hand was obtained from the Costa Rican national landing
statistics registered by the Instituto Costarricense de Pesca y
Acuicultura (INCOPESCA). The time series data collected from
1994 to 2014 consists of monthly records of the main target
species and groups (ﬁsh and invertebrates) ﬁshed and landed
inside the Gulf of Nicoya, measured in kg. The catches were
organized by ﬁshing ﬂeet and gear. The monthly catch data
was then converted into tons per square kilometer of the entire
area (1530 km 2) per year. Fishing eﬀort time series data were
added to the model to realistically simulate changes in the ﬁshing
pressure over the last 20 years (1994ñ2014). Fishing eﬀort data
(days ﬁshing and number of ﬁshing trips) per ﬂeet is available
for the years prior to 2005. Thereafter, only combined ﬁshing
eﬀort was available for both the artisanal and semi-industrial
ﬂeets. We then divided this eﬀort for the artisanal and semi-
industrial ﬂeets using percentages estimated from previous years
and current information about recent developments in the ﬁshing
ﬂeets and ﬁshing zones (INCOPESCA). Biomass estimates of all
target groups were entered for the beginning and for the endpoint
of the simulations (1993 and 2013) from the EwE reference
models presented in Alms and Wolﬀ (2019).
Environmental Forcing Functions
In order to account for possible environmental impacts on the
diﬀerent model compartments, time series data derived from
satellite images were used for the simulations. The data was taken
from the Sea-viewing Wide Field-of-view Sensor (SeaWIFS)
project and the Moderate Resolution Imaging Spectroradiometer
(MODIS) provided by the NASA (NASA Ocean Color). As
a ﬁrst approach to ﬁnd signiﬁcant environmental drivers,
the most common marine climate factors were tested, i.e.,
daytime and night-time Sea Surface Temperature ( ◦C), sea
surface salinity (ppt), zonal wind speed (m s −1) and direction,
tropical easterly trade wind speed (m s −1), and precipitation
rates (mm). Additionally, speciﬁc ENSO related parameters
were used, i.e., Eastern Equatorial Paciﬁc Sea Level Pressure,
SST in El Niño regions 1 + 2 and 3, 3.4 and 4 (National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 2020a), as well as
proxies for primary productivity, such as Chlorophyll a (Chl a)
concentrations (mg m −3), photosynthetically active radiation
(Einstein m−2 day−1), dissolved organic matter (mg m −3),
particulate organic matter (mg m−3) and high colored dissolved
organic matter. The time series data were standardized by scaling
the values to the (0.5,1.5) range, according to the following
formula:
x
′
=
(
max
′
− min
′)
÷ (max− min)· (x− max)+ max
whereas each time series value x was scaled according to the new
maximum: max’ = 1.5 and new minimum value min’ = 0.5.
Hypothesis Testing and Model Selection
The EwE time series ﬁtting routine was used to identify the model
that matches the variation in the abundance of the functional
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 3 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 4
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
FIGURE 1 | Maps of the study area (Gulf of Nicoya, Costa Rica), modiﬁed from Alms and Wolff (2019).
groups with the historical catch time series data of the Gulf
of Nicoya. For the choice of model procedure forcing data is
needed to trace the biomass changes of the model compartments
over time and reference data is necessary for comparison and
validation of the models. In conclusion, three essential classes
of ecosystem drivers were tested: anthropogenic factors (ﬁshing,
pollution), trophic control mechanisms (interactions) and the
inﬂuence of the chemical and physical environment (climate).
Fishing eﬀort (days ﬁshing) and environmental time series
data of the environmental parameters mentioned above were
used to force model group catches and biomasses over time,
whereas the recorded historic landings served as (observational)
reference data for the catch. The eﬀect of the forcing data on the
goodness of model ﬁt could then be observed in the resulting
biomass and catch estimates. We used the predicted variations
of environmental factors in the ETP related to future climate
change as given by the IPCC (IPCC, 2007) and selected the
predictions for South and Central America (Latin America) for
two emission scenarios, namely the representative concentration
pathways RCP4.5 (radiative forcing of 4.5 W m−2 by 2100) and
RCP8.5 (radiative forcing > 8.5 W m−2 by 2100).
The vulnerability settings in the model represent the assumed
trophic control mechanisms between functional groups (later
trophic eﬀects). While vulnerabilities can be set between 1 and
100, 2 is used as the default setting. At a low vulnerability
setting (close to 1) an increasing predator biomass does not
cause a substantial increase in the predation mortality of the
prey (bottomñup control). On the contrary, at high vulnerability
values (up to 100) an increasing predator biomass causes a
similar increase in the predation mortality of the prey (topñ
down control). In the time series routine, the EwE software
modiﬁes the vulnerability parameter of the predator groups
from its default 2 to ﬁnd the setting which reduces the sum
of square diﬀerence between the predicted and the observed
data (Scott et al., 2016). The Stepwise Fitting Procedure for
automated ﬁtting as described by Scott et al. (2016) was used,
allowing to test a high number of settings to ﬁnd the best
ﬁt model. The routine tested for the most sensitive predator
and predator-prey interactions. The search for vulnerability
parameters set for the predator columns of the model resulted
in better outcomes than by each prey/predator cell, thus only
these results will be presented in the following. For the model
ﬁtting procedure 22 time series were used as a reference, thus a
maximum of 22-1 = 21 vulnerability parameters were estimated.
In the same manner, primary productivity (PP) anomalies can
be estimated by the software. The software searches for an
anomaly PP function to simulate potential bottomñup control
mechanisms on the ecosystem. The time series data contained
19 years, thus 2ñ19 spline points could be calculated (Scott
et al., 2016). For the model time series ﬁtting procedure, the best
practice is to use statistical hypotheses testing (Mackinson et al.,
2009; Scott et al., 2016) that is based on ecological knowledge.
Table 1 summarizes the scenarios selected. In general terms it
was hypothesized that temporal changes in primary productivity
due to regional oscillations in environmental conditions on one
hand, and ﬁshery induced changes in the trophic control of the
food web on the other hand (through changes in the relative
biomass contribution of the diﬀerent ﬁshing target species) both
might have contributed to the observed temporal variation in the
volume and composition of the catch.
The most representative model was selected based on the
calculated sum of squares and the Akaike information criterion
as an output of the Ecosim routine (AIC). The AIC was calculated
as follows:
AIC= n× log
(minSS
n
)
+ 2k (1)
Here, n is the number of observations (data points) being ﬁtted
and k is the number of parameters estimated (k max = number of
time series - 1), SS is the sum of square residuals and minSS is the
calculated sum of squares.
To prevent overﬁtting and to select the most parsimonious
model for the given data, the AIC is a good indicator to
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 4 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 5
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
TABLE 1 | Hypothesis-based model ﬁtting.
Hypothesis Scenario Biomass Fishing
effort
Trophic
effects
PP
anomalies
Time series
data
1 Changes in ﬁshing effort alone explains observed biomass
and catch changes over time
Fishing only, default
vulnerability, v = 2
X X
2 Fishing changes the biomass proportions of model
compartments causing trophic effects and biomass
changes in model groups
Fishing + vulnerability search X X X
3 Changes in ﬁshing effort and parallel changes in primary
productivity cause observed changes in catches and
biomass of compartments
Fishing, default
vulnerability + Primary
production anomaly
X X X
4 In addition to the above listed (3) trophic control
mechanisms also drive observed changes
Fishing + vulnerability
search + Primary production
anomaly
X X X X
5 In addition to the above listed (3) environmental parameters
that explain additional inter-annual ﬂuctuations and
long-term trends in catches and biomass
Fishing + vulnerability
search + Environmental time
series
X X X X
Selection of ﬁve model scenarios, including a combination of time series data [Yearly Biomass (t/km 2), ﬁshing effort (days ﬁshing), trophic effects (vulnerability setting by
predator, between 0 and 100)], primary production anomalies, time series data of several climatic and physical factors forcing primary productivity.
use, as it includes penalties for increasing the number of
adjusted parameters. The AIC assumes that all data points are
independent. Since this is not always the case with ﬁsheries data, a
conservative approach was chosen and the number of parameters
(k ñ 1) was based on the number of time series instead of single
data points. For small sample sizes it is recommended to use
the AIC corrected for small sample sizes (AICc) and since the
AICc converges to AIC as n increases, the AICc can be employed
regardless of the sample size (Burnham and Anderson, 2004). The
AICc is derived from the AIC as follows:
AICc= AIC+
(
2k k+ 1
n− k− 1
)
(2)
According to the protocol created by Burnham and Anderson,
2004, several additional measures associated with the AIC were
calculated to improve model comparison:
The relative diﬀerence ( 1i) in AICc compared to the best
model (AICcmin)
1i= AICci− AICcmin (3)
the relative likelihood of the model having the best ﬁt
relative likelihood= exp
(−1i
2
)
(4)
and the Akaike weights (Wi):
wi=
exp
(
−1i
2
)
∑exp
(
−1i
2
) (5)
where wi is a measure of the strength of evidence for each model,
indicating the probability that the model is the most accurate one
among the set of possible models.
The models were ranked by AICc and their relative diﬀerence
was compared to the minimum AIC. In general, the model was
selected that provided the lowest (most negative) AICc value,
and models with fewer parameters were favored. However, to
select the most representative model that conveniently explains
variations in the data, several approaches can be followed. In this
case, all models with an AIC diﬀerence 1i < 2 compared to the
best model were considered. The favored models were selected
based on the SS decreases, the number of estimated variables and
the ability of the model to explain variations in the historical
catch data. In order to compare the trends of the observed
and predicted values, the data were visualized (see Figure 5 ).
To validate the selection of the model, the model’s functional
groups and their data availability (catch and eﬀort data) were
taken into account.
Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analysis
In order to examine the sensitivity of the results with regard
to uncertainty of the input parameter values, Monte Carlo
simulations were run for each scenario. Each trial (number of
trials = 100) represents an Ecosim run with a randomly selected
set of Ecopath parameters (B, P/B, EE, BA) for each group,
within a distribution centered around the original values. The
coeﬃcient of variation of each parameter was selected according
to the certainty of the input data set in the pedigree, deﬁned
by the quality of the data from estimates from low to high
precision sampling (Heymans et al., 2016). The predicted biomass
trajectories and the sum of squares of the best iteration runs were
compared to the initial input data to detect changes in model
behavior due to changes in the input data (Travers et al., 2010).
These steps ensure an analysis of the data that is considerably less
sensitive to errors.
RESULTS
Fisheries Data
Trends in the ﬁshing eﬀort and catch per unit eﬀort of the
artisanal and semi-industrial ﬂeets are displayed in Figure 2.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 5 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 6
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
FIGURE 2 | (A) Semi-industrial (ﬁlled triangles) and artisanal (circles) catches (t/year),(B) Semi-industrial (ﬁlled triangles) and artisanal (circles) ﬁshing effort (days
ﬁshing/year),(C) Semi-industrial (ﬁlled triangles) and artisanal (circles) Catch per unit effort (CPUE) (kg/day ﬁshing) for the years 1994–2014 (missing effort data 2006
and 2007) in the Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica).
It can be observed that the semi-industrial ﬁshing eﬀort
increased until 2000, followed by a slight decline in the early
2000s and a further drastic decline after 2006 and 2007, resulting
in an eﬀort reduction of 65% in total. The artisanal ﬁshing
eﬀort remained high until 2005, with some variations, and then
declined drastically. Recent levels of ﬁshing eﬀort are reduced by
55% compared to 2005; also due to the seasonal ﬁshing ban “veda”
that lasts 3 months.
A peak of artisanal catches can be observed in the late 1990s,
followed by decreasing catches.
Ecosim Simulations
The EwE time series simulations of the last two decades indicated
that the ﬁshing eﬀort explains a large part of the variability in
the catch and biomass data of some functional groups (Figure 2).
The semi-industrial ﬂeet’s eﬀort improves the model of the target
species shrimp and sardine, as well as of small demersal ﬁsh and
crabs as bycatch species of the shrimp trawl ﬂeet.
Since not all trends in the catch data can be explained by
variations in the ﬁshing eﬀort of diﬀerent ﬂeets, the possible role
of trophic eﬀects was taken into account and the vulnerability
settings of 11 diﬀerent predator groups were changed from its
default to simulate topñdown and bottomñup eﬀects ( Table 2).
This allowed for further improvement of the model ﬁt and a
reduction of the SS.
The assessment of the prey-predator interactions in the model
of the Gulf of Nicoya provides important information on the
food web structure of the system. The most representative
vulnerability settings are displayed for each predator group,
whereas bottomñup (B), topñdown (T) interactions are indicated
in Table 2. The top predatory ﬁsh species in the system, mackerel
and barracuda as well as rays, sharks and cephalopods, are
bottomñup controlled as well as the lower trophic level species,
such as benthos, shrimps, and crabs. According to the modeling
results, only few species exert topñdown control on their prey,
such as jacks and pompanos, lobster, seabirds and zooplankton.
Mid-trophic-level species, small pelagics and small demersals are
assumed to exert mixed control on their prey and predators.
Furthermore, some of the functional groups seemed to be
further aﬀected by inter-annual production anomalies. The
consideration of these anomalies (scenarios 3 and 4) further
improved the model ( Figure 3 ). The best model was obtained
by adjusting the trophic interactions and adding environmental
forcing data (Scenario 5) related to changes in primary
productivity. Moreover, adding Chl a time series to the model, a
proxy for the available amount of phytoplankton in the system,
improved the model substantially. Together with changes in the
vulnerability settings of 10 groups, the model (sum of squares)
improved by as much as 69% (and showed the lowest AICc).
Table 3 gives an additional overview of the factors that improve
the model of each functional group.
The variations of the physical environment in the Gulf of
Nicoya linked to the ENSO cycle were represented in the model
by the Eastern Equatorial Sea Level Pressure (SLP) time series,
leading to substantial improvement of the model. Changing the
vulnerability setting of once again 10 groups resulted in the most
representative model and a 60% reduction of the SS (as well as
low AICc values) (Figure 3).
Figure 4 elucidates the relation between phytoplankton
productivity (Chla as proxy), the SLP and the ENSO cycle. This
shows that there is a negative relationship between the East
Equatorial Sea Level Pressure and the El Niño phenomenon. El
Niño years are associated with negative anomalies in Sea Level
Pressure (SLP), e.g., in the years 2002 and 2009. A pronounced
positive peak in the SLP in 1999 can be associated with a strong
La Niña event, the counterpart of El Niño. Positive SST anomalies
occur during episodes of El Niño (e.g., 2002, 2009). Maximum
Chla concentrations coincide with La Niña episodes (2005, 2012).
In Figure 5 the two Ecosim model scenarios and the baseline
scenario are presented together with the catch reference time
series-data for the 10 selected functional groups. The baseline
scenario includes solely the ﬁshing eﬀort and the two best
ﬁtted scenarios include either Sea Level Pressure or Chl a
concentrations. Both time series can be used seperately to force
phytoplankton productivity, improving the overall model ﬁt. For
several functional groups the model’s predictions of the catch are
relatively close to the observational data. Especially for important
target groups (shrimps and small pelagics) the model can predict
changes in the catches. For some other groups, such as rays and
sharks, catches for some years are above or below the predicted
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 6 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 7
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
TABLE 2 | Prey-predator interactions in the Gulf of Nicoya Model (scenario 2).
Predator prey 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
1 Seabirds
2 Mackerel and barracuda
3 Rays and sharks B
4 Large drums and snook
5 Catﬁsh B D
6 Morays and eels B B D D
7 Jacks and pompanos B B D T D
8 Snapper and grunts T D
9 Cephalopods T B D D D T D B T
10 Lobster B B D
11 Flatﬁsh B B D D
12 Small demersals T B B D D D B D
13 Small pelagics T B B T D B
14 Crabs T B B D D D T D B T
15 Epibenthos T B D D D T D B T D D B B
16 Endobenthos T B D D T D D B B
17 Shrimps B D D D T D B D D B
18 Zooplankton T B D D B B B B T
19 Phytoplankton D D B B T
20 Mangroves B B B
21 Microphytobenthos D D B B B
22 Detritus D D D D D B B B B T
The vulnerability settings for each predator group are displayed, resulting in the lowest model sum of square calculated by the ﬁtting procedure. Trophic interactions are
labeled B: bottom–up interaction with v < 2, T: top–down interaction with v > 2, and D: default setting.
values. The results show that some functional groups (e.g., lobster,
small demersals, small pelagics, and shrimps) are more aﬀected by
the environmental factors than others and can be predicted best
by scenarios including phytoplankton forcing. Table 4 provides
the related sum of square (residual sum of squares, regression
sum of squares and total sum of squares) values for each target
group and scenario presented in Figure 5.
DISCUSSION
Combined Ecosystem Effect
The aim of the present study was to identify factors inﬂuencing
the changes observed in the Gulf of Nicoya ecosystem over
the past two decades, and to understand how these factors
control the energy ﬂows in the system (bottomñup, topñdown or
mixed/wasp waist control). We hypothesized that a combination
of several drivers might aﬀect the ecosystem and may decrease
its natural resilience toward future environmental changes (Côté
and Darling, 2010). As it has been shown in previous studies,
ecosystem parameters calculated from Ecopath models can be
used as indicators of the status of the ecosystem (Wolﬀ et al.,
2012; Heymans et al., 2014). Accordingly, ﬁsheries and/or climate
impacts on the ecosystem should result in changes in the sensitive
system state indicators.
The oﬃcially registered overall ﬁshing eﬀort in the Gulf of
Nicoya declined drastically since the early 2000s. On the one
hand, the reduction is due to the implementation of the seasonal
ﬁshing ban “veda” in the inner Gulf of Nicoya, which has directly
reduced the yearly eﬀort since 2006 by approximately 60%. On
the other hand, the shrimp ﬁshing ﬂeet reduced its capacities
due to a lack of resources and the expiration of licenses. In 2013
shrimp trawling was declared unconstitutional in Costa Rica and
no further licenses were said to be granted in the future. The last
remaining shrimp licenses expired in 2018 and 2019.
Although the overall ﬁshing eﬀort decreased, the CPUE of
the artisanal and semi-industrial ﬂeet increased compared to
the early 1990s, despite the heavy exploitation of the resources.
However, gear improvements changed the relation between the
CPUE and the actual abundance of species and tend to mask the
trends of the species exploitation status (Arreguın-Sánchez et al.,
2002; Ward and Myers, 2005). Illegal ﬁshing gear improvements,
i.e., toward Taiwanese lines and smaller gillnet mesh sizes might
have allowed increasing catches per unit eﬀort. These changes in
the ﬁshing ﬂeet have most likely increased the overall eﬃciency of
the ﬁshing gear and the catchability of certain target resources.
We come to the conclusion ( Table 3) that both the semi-
industrial and artisanal (gillnet) ﬂeet negatively inﬂuence the
distribution of some target species (e.g., cephalopods, rays,
and sharks). However the negative impact on the major target
species is dominated by the shrimp trawl ﬂeet, which negatively
inﬂuences its target species as well as its bycatch species and by
the semi-industrial sardine ﬂeet. The artisanal handline ﬂeet does
not appear to have a relevant inﬂuence on any target species. The
manual mollusk extraction is a very selective harvesting method,
however the removal of piangua ( Anadara tuberculosa, Arcoida:
Arcida) drastically increased in the last decade and exceeded
sustainable levels.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 7 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 8
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
FIGURE 3 | (A) Sum of squares and the corrected Akaike information criterion (AICc) of all tested models of each scenario and (B) number of estimated parameters
(vulnerabilities and or spline points of primary production anomalies) of the ‘best models’ of each scenario.
The evaluation of the trophic eﬀects of the most representative
models helped to investigate the most relevant control
mechanisms between predators and their prey ( Table 2 ).
As seen in Table 3, the top predatory ﬁsh species in the system
as well as cephalopods are bottomñup controlled by their prey.
The same force applies to lower trophic level groups, such as
benthos, shrimps and crabs. According to our analysis, only
few species exert topñdown control on their prey, such as jacks
and pompanos, lobster, seabirds and zooplankton. It seems that
mid-trophic-level species exert wasp-waist control on their prey
and predators. This is in agreement with ﬁndings of Griﬃths
et al. (2013) and Roux et al. (2013). As has been found in these
studies, the mid-trophic levels are only represented by few
species, such as plankton feeding small pelagic ﬁsh.
Our analysis conﬁrms these ﬁndings for the Gulf of Nicoya
ecosystem and highlights the importance of the mid-trophic
level species, which are heavily exploited by both semi-industrial
ﬁsheries (small pelagics) and artisanal ﬂeets (small demersals).
The observed decline of these species did not only have
ecological, economic and social consequences (Alms and Wolﬀ,
2019; Queiros et al., 2019), but may also lead to unfavorable
and irreversible shifts in the ecosystem. This has been observed
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 8 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 9
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
TABLE 3 | Catch time series: factors [ﬂeet effort, trophic effects, primary
production anomalies: Sea Level Pressure (SLP) and Chlorophyll a] that improve
the model (reduce the sum of squares) of each functional group and the total
improvement of the sum of squares for all groups for each factor analyzed.
Functional group Fishing effort Trophic
effects
PP
anomaly
Cephalopods Gillnets X
Corvina and snook X SLP
Crabs Manual, SI shrimp SLP
Eel SLP
Jacks and pompano Chl a
Lobster Art. manual Chl a
Mackerel and barracuda Chl a
Rays and sharks Longline X Chl a
Shrimps SI shrimp, Art. gillnets X
Small demersals SI shrimp Chl a
Small pelagics SI sardine x Chl a
Total reduction model SS −24.91 −18.52 −69.30
(−60.56)
in other ecosystems, namely through the expansion of jellyﬁsh
(Roux et al., 2013) or may lead to the decrease of predatory
species, such as ﬁsh, seabirds, and mammals (e.g., Crawford and
Shelton, 1978; Pichegru et al., 2010).
The modeling approach we applied in our study clearly
showed that the variations in the catch cannot solely be explained
by variations in ﬁshing pressure. Similar results have been
found in other systems, such as the Southern Benguela system
(Shannon et al., 2008).
Adding environmental data related to the primary
productivity of the system to the simulations considerably
increased the reliability of the model.
Especially primary producers are strongly inﬂuenced by the
environmental conditions through changes in nutrient or light
availability (through wind, current, or upwelling pattern changes)
and growth conditions (if in situ temperatures changes) (Hays
et al., 2005). Since changes in phytoplankton productivity are
closely related to zooplankton abundance (Runge, 1988, FAO),
e.g., bottomñup force through the entire food chain can be
the consequence. For the analysis of the eﬀects of inter-annual
environmental variations on the ecosystems in the ETP region,
the El NiñoñSouthern Oscillation (ENSO) cycle needs to be
considered, which is known to be a major factor of climate
variability in the Eastern Tropical Paciﬁc with global impact. It
is anticipated that ENSO will potentially modify in frequency
and intensity due to global climate change (Collins et al., 2010;
Cai et al., 2014).
In our study, the Chl a concentration appeared to be the
most relevant of tested environmental drivers. It is a proxy for
the amount of plankton in the water column, which directly
aﬀects the bottom of the food chain. Increasing phytoplankton
availability enhances zooplankton growth, resulting in higher
availability of prey for low trophic level species foraging on
zooplankton. The associated increased production will then
cascade through the entire food web.
On the contrary, a reduced primary production will lead
to a lack of foraging success of species in higher trophic
levels. Changes in the vertical and horizontal distribution of the
plankton could also cause changes in the spatial distribution of
foraging ﬁsh with eﬀect on their predators and ﬁshery through
an alteration in catchability. Our results indicate that particularly
the lower trophic level groups, such as small demersal- and small
pelagic ﬁsh beneﬁt from increased phytoplankton availability.
Since catches of predatory ﬁsh species, such as rays, sharks,
mackerel and barracuda, as well as the catches of lobster also
positively beneﬁt from high Chl a concentrations, this could be
due to a bottomñup eﬀect due to increased prey availability of
these groups. Plankton feeding ﬁsh are known to aggregate closer
to the coast due to food concentration in these areas. Foraging
ﬁsh follow their prey and likewise occur closer to the coast.
Thus, the catchability of certain ﬁsh species increases for the
coastal ﬁsheries.
Furthermore, other abiotic factors of the marine environment
(e.g., wind direction and speed, light availability) can directly
inﬂuence higher trophic levels of the system, for instance by
FIGURE 4 | Environmental time series 1997–2014: anomalies of Sea Surface Temperature (SST) (red line), Chlorophyll a concentration (green line) and the Sea Level
Pressure (blue line) in the Equatorial Eastern Paciﬁc Ocean associated with the El Niño-Southern Oscillation cycle.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 9 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 10
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
FIGURE 5 | Yearly catches (ﬁlled circles) and model predictions for the simulated EwE scenarios: ﬁshing effort (black line); ﬁshing effort, trophic effects and Sea Level
Pressure forcing phytoplankton productivity (blue line); ﬁshing effort, trophic effects and Chlorophyll a concentrations forcing phytoplankton productivity (green line).
aﬀecting larval dispersal and the productivity of certain species
(Runge, 1988).
The environmental indicator that led to the most
representative model was the East Equatorial Sea Level Pressure
(SLP), which is negatively related to the El Niño phenomenon
(Figure 4 ). At high SLP (La Niña events), a lower SST can
be observed (station ElNiño4) as well as stronger winds and
upwelling, and lower precipitation rates. As we expected a
negative impact of El Niño on the catches, the East Equatorial
SLP as the inverse of SST anomalies proved to be a good measure.
In the Eastern Paciﬁc, the ENSO cycle is known to alter the
oceanographic condition in the area and to aﬀect a variety
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 10 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 11
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
TABLE 4 | Calculated sum of squares: residual sum of squares (SSE), regression sum of squares (SSR), and total sum of squares (TSS) for the model’s predictions of the
selected scenarios and important target groups compared to the reference catch data.
Fishing effort Fishing effort, trophic effect and SLP Fishing effort, trophic effects and Chla
Species SSE SSR TSS SSE SSR TSS SSE SSR TSS
Cephalopods 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
Crabs 0.0012 0.0001 0.0013 0.0012 0.0001 0.0013 0.0012 0.0001 0.0013
Jacks and pompanos 0.0213 0.0115 0.0328 0.0166 0.0077 0.0243 0.0115 0.0041 0.0156
Large corvina and snook 0.0226 0.0132 0.0358 0.0185 0.0124 0.0309 0.0297 0.0182 0.0479
Lobster 0.0001 0.0000 0.0001 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000 0.0000
Morays and eel 0.0278 0.0175 0.0453 0.0136 0.0039 0.0174 0.0180 0.0107 0.0287
Rays and sharks 0.0481 0.0225 0.0706 0.0330 0.0119 0.0449 0.0307 0.0091 0.0398
Shrimps 0.8307 0.6720 1.5027 0.9318 1.0585 1.9904 0.9409 1.0539 1.9948
Small demersals 9.8339 9.0453 18.8792 8.1687 7.9805 16.1492 3.5483 3.4970 7.0453
Small pelagics 14.6412 8.3203 22.9615 11.6363 5.0199 16.6562 6.9506 2.1752 9.1258
The lowest SSE, SSR and TSS values, indicating the model scenario with the best model ﬁt, are marked in bold. (1) Fishing effort only; (2) ﬁshing effort, trophic effects
and Sea Level Pressure (SLP) forcing phytoplankton productivity; (3) ﬁshing effort, trophic effects, and Chlorophyll-a concentrations forcing phytoplankton productivity.
of marine communities (National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, 2020b). Ah it has been observed in the upwelling
regions of the Humboldt Current system, small pelagic ﬁsh
biomass decrease during strong El Niño years and the total
ﬁsheries production declined up to 50% (Wolﬀ et al., 2003, 2012;
Taylor et al., 2008a).
Our study reveals that several species in the Gulf of Nicoya
are inﬂuenced by these large-scale environmental conditions
associated with the ENSO cycle. We speciﬁcally observed that
variations in the catches of functional groups (large drums and
snook, crabs and morays and eels) are related to the ENSO cycle.
At higher temperatures during El Niño events some species
in the Gulf of Nicoya migrate further out of the gulf into cooler
oceanic waters while others, i.e., small pelagic ﬁsh (sardine),
aggregate close to the beaches at the Paciﬁc coast of Costa
Rica. Similar aggregation patterns of small pelagic ﬁsh can be
observed in other regions (Gutierrez et al., 2007). A shallow and
more pronounced thermocline can therefore limit the vertical
distribution of certain pelagic species and may increase their
catchability in the upper water column (Bigelow et al., 2002).
Warm water masses can also cause other species to move oﬀshore
into deeper and cooler waters, reducing their catchability.
According to the FAO, most of the inter-annual ﬂuctuations
in total ﬁsh production in the Eastern Central Paciﬁc (Fishing
Area 77) are due to changes in the abundance of small
pelagic ﬁsh (FAO), that play a central role in this and many
other marine ecosystems (Frederiksen et al., 2006; Shannon
et al., 2008). ENSO related changes in water properties (e.g.,
heavy rains washing nutrients into the gulf or calm periods
leading to enhanced water stratiﬁcation and oxygen deﬁciency)
might also increase the frequency of toxic algae blooms that
have previously been observed in the Gulf of Nicoya, and
eventually cause ﬁsh mass mortalities in the Gulf of Nicoya
(Vargas-Montero and Freer, 2004).
The ﬁndings of our study suggests that there are multiple
factors that impact the ecosystem, besides the exploitation by
the semi-industrial ﬁshing ﬂeets. Environmental forcing plays an
important role in the explanation of species biomass variabilities,
especially in relation to the ENSO cycle, together with bottomñup
eﬀects, due to ﬂuctuations in primary productivity. Furthermore,
mid-trophic level species, such as small pelagic ﬁsh, have a pivotal
role in the food web of the Gulf of Nicoya.
Uncertainty and Sensitivity Analysis
Although we reported a substantial reduction of the oﬃcially
reported ﬁshing eﬀort in the gulf, it can be assumed that
unreported catches, ﬁshing without licenses and ﬁshing during
the closed season have occurred during the observational period.
These unreported ﬁshing activities cannot be quantiﬁed and are
thus not part of the study.
The Ecopath models have been carefully validated with a
prescribed balancing routine of Link (2010). The balancing
process of the models has been described in Alms and Wolﬀ
(2019). Wee adhered to the suggestions of best-practice in
Ecopath with Ecosim food-web models for ecosystem-based
management by Heymans et al. (2016). Adding data to the
model such as model drivers and reference data sets using the
Ecosim tools helped to further validate the quality and accuracy
of the created static Ecopath model. The model was additionally
calibrated with historical ﬁshing datasets and the comparison of
the model predictions to reference data allowed for the validation
of the model performance (Heymans et al., 2016). The calculated
EwE Pedigree Index of 0.29, based on the conﬁdence intervals of
all input parameters, indicated that the model’s level of precision
is in the intermediate to the upper range, compared to other
published Ecopath models worldwide (Morissette, 2007). We
believe that the AICc is a good measure for validation of the
selected model. We followed the recommendation to adapt the
AIC for small sample sizes (Burnham and Anderson, 2004).
The aim was to provide a holistic modeling approach, in the
sense looking at combined eﬀects inﬂuencing the species biomass
variations. We covered trophic eﬀects, the eﬀects of ﬁshing, the
most prominent climate variables, and physical and chemical
factors (also as proxy for pollution). However, the selection
of factors was limited by the availability of time-series data
and not every single possible parameter could be tested. Some
factors, such as human disturbances, sedimentation, solid waste
pollution and agricultural pollution, could not be assessed. For
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 11 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 12
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
future research it would be useful to incorporate social-ecological
interactions into the model.
Management Outlook and Implications
The present study lead to the conclusion that ﬁsheries
management policies entirely based on ﬁsheries information
only, with no consideration of the inﬂuence of environmental
factors is not suﬃcient for the development of a holistic
management strategy. Both ﬁshing regulations and
environmental monitoring needs to go hand in hand. We
found that the shrimp trawl ﬂeet predominately aﬀects the
distribution of important target species. Thus the advised ﬁshing
ban and the expiration of licenses concerning the trawler can
be seen as a promising management measure. The sardine
purse-seine ﬂeet needs to be seen critically as we could highlight
the importance of small pelagic ﬁsh to the ecosystem and their
susceptibility to climate change. The impact of the artisanal ﬂeet
is minor compared to the semi-industrial ﬂeet. However the
gillnet ﬂeet using small mesh sizes can be potentially harmful
for a sustainable ﬁsheries. To reduce illegal ﬁshing activities
stronger control mechanisms and rigor enforcement are needed.
Furthermore, the manual mollusk extraction needs to be limited,
as yearly around 8 million individuals are harvested from the
Gulf of Nicoya (SINAC, 2019).
Environmental monitoring needs to be considered and
combined with ﬁsheries assessment studies, due to the
considerable inﬂuence of these factors on the entire trophic
system as well as their social-economic impacts. A regular
monitoring programme for the Gulf of Nicoya is necessary
to track changes in primary production, and phytoplankton
community composition in the Gulf of Nicoya, that may be
driven by both increased coastal pollution and environmental
change. To apply appropriate management measures, a
forecasting approach is needed (Clark et al., 2001) that takes
into account knowledge of the current and predicted ecosystem
structure and functioning (Valette-Silver and Scavia, 2003).
Our study may be used as a reference to further assess the
regional impacts of future climate variations and extreme events
in an ecosystem already altered by the ﬁsheries. In the Gulf of
Nicoya, like in other tropical environments, we need to consider
the eﬀects of increasing temperatures, as stated by Cheung et al.
(2013) and Palomares and Pauly (2019). In contrast to colder
regions, no species adapted for warm regions will be available
to replace species that are displaced by the high temperature
thus there will most likely be a temperature-driven loss of
species in these areas.
Of particular relevance for future management scenarios
are regional changes that have been predicted by the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) until
the year 2100. According to the IPCC the Gross Primary
Productivity is expected to decrease, mainly due to an increase
in Colored Dissolved Organic Matter (CDOM), which absorbs
a fraction of the Photosynthetically Active Radiation (PAR)
(Thrane et al., 2014; Wolf and Heuschele, 2018). One can thus
expect that Chl a concentrations decrease in the Gulf of Nicoya
and that phytoplankton composition, quantity and distribution
will change. In addition, mangrove coverage is expected to
further decrease due to sea level rise and changes in salinity
(Ward et al., 2016). While mangroves only account for an
estimate of 1% of the gulf ’s primary production (Wolﬀ et al.,
1998), they contribute to the system’s productivity in the Gulf
of Nicoya by providing organic matter and protected areas,
enhancing ﬁsh and invertebrate productivity (Wolﬀ et al., 1998).
Considering the predicted decrease in primary productivity, it
seems necessary for a sustainable ecosystem management to
adapt the volume of ﬁshery catches to potentially lower overall
resource productivity.
Furthermore, there is a high uncertainty concerning the future
dynamics of the ENSO cycle. The frequency and intensity of El
Niño events is likely to be altered by climate change, however
it is unknown to what extent (e.g.,Collins et al., 2010; Cai et al.,
2014). As our simulations suggest, catch and biomass ﬂuctuations
in the Gulf of Nicoya are linked to ENSO related variations in the
Equatorial Paciﬁc Sea Level Pressure, and a constant monitoring
of the regional ENSO impact is thus imperative.
As we have suggested previously (Alms and Wolﬀ, 2019), it is
crucial to think of measures to sustain primary productivity and
to protect keystone groups, benthos and shrimps in the Gulf of
Nicoya, but also adequately manage the mid-trophic level species
such as small pelagic and small demersal ﬁsh. It is known that
in the gulf, like in other coastal areas and estuaries with high
abiotic variability (Heymans et al., 2014), these groups are central
for ecosystem functioning and need to be prioritized in future
management plans. In addition to adequate ﬁsheries regulation,
possible measures for improving the overall management of
the Gulf of Nicoya could be the improvement of wastewater
management and treatment and solid waste disposal plans. For
the conservation of the coastal marine environment the further
protection and restoration of mangroves is an important issue
that needs to be further pursued (SINAC, 2019).
Furthermore our models can be used to directly engage
stakeholders in the management plans, as it has been attempted
by Sánchez-Jiménez et al. (2019). The EwE software was used as
an interactive communication tool with artisanal ﬁshers in the
Gulf of Nicoya, to facilitate discussions on changes in the ﬁshing
ecosystem over time.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The data analyzed in this study is subject to the following
licenses/restrictions: “The ﬁsheries data belong to the Instituto
Costarricense de Pesca y Acuicultura, Costa Rica and the Centro
de Investigación en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología, Costa Rica.
The authors are not authorized to publish the original/raw data.”
Requests to access these datasets should be directed to https:
//www.incopesca.go.cr/Contactenos/.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
MW contributed the Ecopath baseline model (Wolﬀ et al.,
1998) and initiated the research cooperation with the Centro
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 12 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 13
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
de Investigación en Ciencias del Mar y Limnología (CIMAR)
and the Universidad de Costa Rica and supervised the project.
V A performed the data analysis, calculations, and the numerical
simulations, drafted the manuscript, and designed the ﬁgures.
Both authors contributed to the ﬁnal version of the manuscript.
FUNDING
This study was ﬁnanced by the Project MONICOYA [Modeling
Two Decades of Change of the Nicoya Gulf (Costa Rica)
Ecosystem: Implications for Future Management] of the Leibniz
Centre for Tropical Marine Research (ZMT), in which V A had
the opportunity to conduct her Ph.D. studies. This work was
also supported by GLOMAR ñ Bremen International Graduate
School for Marine Sciences. This research did not receive any
speciﬁc grants by funding agencies in the public, commercial, or
not-for-proﬁt sectors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The facilities in Costa Rica and some of the data about the
Gulf of Nicoya were provided by the Centro de Investigación en
Ciencias del Mar y Limnología (CIMAR) and the Universidad
de Costa Rica. The research project was strongly supported by
our main project partner Alvaro Morales Ramírez in Costa Rica,
who provided the infrastructure and guidance in Costa Rica and
helped to develop the project collaboration between the Leibniz
Centre for Tropical Marine Research and the CIMAR. Several
other colleagues from the CIMAR and the University of Costa
Rica supported the project, Jorge Cortés Núñez, José A. Vargas
Zamora, Helena Molina Ureña, and Catalina Benavides Varela.
Berny Marín Alpízar (INCOPESCA) supported the study with
valuable advice and guidance concerning the marine resources
in the Gulf of Nicoya. Moritz Stäbler (ZMT) supported the
time series modeling task with his experience and advice on the
Ecopath with Ecosim modeling approach.
REFERENCES
Alms, V., and Wolﬀ, M. (2019). The Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica) ﬁsheries system:
two decades of change. Mar. Coast. Fish. 11, 139ñ161. doi: 10.1002/mcf2.10050
Andersen, K. H., and Pedersen, M. (2009). Damped trophic cascades driven by
ﬁshing in model marine ecosystems. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci.277, 795ñ802.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.2009.1512
Arreguın-Sánchez, F., Arcos, E., and Chávez, E. A. (2002). Flows of biomass and
structure in an exploited benthic ecosystem in the Gulf of California, Mexico.
Ecol. Model. 156, 167ñ183. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3800(02)00159-x
Bigelow, A. F., Schroeder, W. C., Collette, B. B., and Klein-MacPhee, G.
(2002). Bigelow and Schroeder’s Fishes of the Gulf of Maine . Washington, DC:
Smithsonian Institution Press.
Brugnoli-Olivera, E., and Morales-Ramírez, A. (2008). Trophic planktonic
dynamics in a tropical estuary, Gulf of Nicoya, Paciﬁc coast of Costa Rica during
El Niño 1997 event. Biol. Mar. Oceanogr. 43, 75ñ89.
BIOMARCC-SINAC-GIZ (2013). Estudios cientíﬁcos de hábitat marino costero y
situación socioeconómica del Pacíﬁco Norte de Costa Rica. San José-Costa Rica.
236.
Burnham, K. P., and Anderson, D. R. (2004). Multimodel inference: understanding
AIC and BIC in model selection.Sociol. Methods Res.33, 261ñ304. doi: 10.1177/
0049124104268644
Cai, W., Borlace, S., Lengaigne, M., van Rensch, P., Collins, M., Vecchi,
G., et al. (2014). Increasing frequency of extreme El Niño events due to
greenhouse warming. Nat. Clim. Change 4, 111ñ116. doi: 10.1038/nclimate
2100
Calvo Vargas, E., Boza Abarca, J., and Berrocal Artavia, K. (2014). Efectos de El
Niño y La Niña Sobre el Comportamiento del Microﬁtoplancton Marino y Las
Variables Fisicoquímicas Durante el 2008 a 2010 en el Golfo de Nicoya, Costa
Rica. REVMAR 6. Available online at: http://www.revistas.una.ac.cr/index.php/
revmar/article/view/6237 (accessed November 2019).
Cheung, W. W., Sarmiento, J. L., Dunne, J., Frölicher, T. L., Lam, V. W., Palomares,
M. D., et al. (2013). Shrinking of ﬁshes exacerbates impacts of global ocean
changes on marine ecosystems. Nat. Clim. Change 3, 254ñ258. doi: 10.1038/
nclimate1691
Clark, D. A., Brown, S., Kicklighter, D. W., Chambers, J. Q., Thomlinson, J. R.,
Ni, J., et al. (2001). Net primary production in tropical forests: an evaluation
and synthesis of existing ﬁeld data. Ecol. Appl. 11, 371ñ384. doi: 10.1890/1051-
0761(2001)011[0371:nppitf]2.0.co;2
Collins, M., An, S.-I., Cai, W., Ganachaud, A., Guilyardi, E., Jin, F.-F., et al. (2010).
The impact of global warming on the tropical Paciﬁc Ocean and El Niño. Nat.
Geosci. 3, 391ñ397. doi: 10.1038/ngeo868
Côté, I. M., and Darling, E. S. (2010). Rethinking ecosystem resilience in the face of
climate change. PLoS Biol. 8:e1000438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1000438
Crawford, R. J., and Shelton, P. A. (1978). Pelagic ﬁsh and seabird interrelationships
oﬀ the coasts of South West and South Africa. Biol. Conserv. 14, 85ñ109. doi:
10.1016/0006-3207(78)90026-5
Cury, P., Bakun, A., Crawford, R. J., Jarre, A., Quinones, R. A., Shannon, L. J.,
et al. (2000). Small pelagics in upwelling systems: patterns of interaction and
structural changes in “wasp-waist” ecosystems. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57, 603ñ618.
doi: 10.1006/jmsc.2000.0712
Duarte, L. O., and Garcıa, C. B. (2004). Trophic role of small pelagic ﬁshes in
a tropical upwelling ecosystem. Ecol. Model. 172, 323ñ338. doi: 10.1016/j.
ecolmodel.2003.09.014
Fiedler, P. C. (2002). Environmental change in the eastern tropical Paciﬁc Ocean:
review of ENSO and decadal variability. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 244, 265ñ283.
doi: 10.3354/meps244265
Frederiksen, M., Edwards, M., Richardson, A. J., Halliday, N. C., and Wanless, S.
(2006). From plankton to top predators: bottom-up control of a marine food
web across four trophic levels.J. Anim. Ecol.75, 1259ñ1268. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2656.2006.01148.x
Griﬃths, S., Olson, R., and Watters, G. (2013). Complex wasp-waist regulation
of pelagic ecosystems in the Paciﬁc Ocean. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 23, 459ñ475.
doi: 10.1007/s11160-012-9301-7
Gutierrez, M., Swartzman, G., Bertrand, A., and Bertrand, S. (2007). Anchovy
(Engraulis ringens) and sardine ( Sardinops sagax ) spatial dynamics and
aggregation patterns in the Humboldt Current ecosystem, Peru, from
1983ñ2003. Fish. Oceanogr. 16, 155ñ168. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2419.2006.
00422.x
Hays, G. C., Richardson, A. J., and Robinson, C. (2005). Climate change and marine
plankton. Trends Ecol. Evol. 20, 337ñ344. doi: 10.1016/j.tree.2005.03.004
Heymans, J. J., Coll, M., Libralato, S., Morissette, L., and Christensen, V. (2014).
Global patterns in ecological indicators of marine food webs: a modelling
approach. PLoS One 9:e0095845. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095845
Heymans, J. J., Coll, M., Link, J. S., Mackinson, S., Steenbeek, J., Walters, C., et al.
(2016). Best practice in Ecopath with Ecosim food-web models for ecosystem-
based management. Ecol. Model. 331, 173ñ184. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2015.
12.007
Hidalgo, M., Rouyer, T., Molinero, J. C., Massutí, E., Moranta, J., Guijarro, B.,
et al. (2011). Synergistic eﬀects of ﬁshing-induced demographic changes and
climate variation on ﬁsh population dynamics. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 426, 1ñ12.
doi: 10.3354/meps09077
IPCC (2007). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Geneva: IPCC.
Jennings, S., and Kaiser, M. J. (1998). The eﬀects of ﬁshing on marine ecosystems.
Adv. Mar. Biol. 34, 201ñ352. doi: 10.1016/s0065-2881(08)60212-6
Ji, X., Neelin, J. D., and Mechoso, C. R. (2015). El niñoñsouthern oscillation sea
level pressure anomalies in the western paciﬁc: why are they there?∗. J. Clim. 28,
8860ñ8872. doi: 10.1175/jcli-d-14-00716.1
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 13 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707
fmars-07-00707 August 28, 2020 Time: 18:7 # 14
Alms and Wolff Gulf of Nicoya (Costa Rica)
Link, J. S. (2010). Adding rigor to ecological network models by evaluating a set
of pre-balance diagnostics: a plea for PREBAL. Ecol. Model. 221, 1580ñ1591.
doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2010.03.012
Lizano, O. G., and Alfaro, E. J. (2004). Algunas características de las corrientes
marinas en el Golfo de Nicoya, Costa Rica. Rev. Biol. Trop. 52, 77ñ94.
Lozano, A. J. G., and Heinen, J. T. (2016). Identifying drivers of collective action
for the co-management of coastal marine ﬁsheries in the Gulf of Nicoya, Costa
Rica. Environ. Manage. 57, 759ñ769. doi: 10.1007/s00267-015-0646-2
Mackinson, S., Daskalov, G., Heymans, J. J., Neira, S., Arancibia, H., Zetina-
Rejón, M., et al. (2009). Which forcing factors ﬁt? Using ecosystem models to
investigate the relative inﬂuence of ﬁshing and changes in primary productivity
on the dynamics of marine ecosystems. Ecol. Model. 220, 2972ñ2987. doi:
10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2008.10.021
Morissette, L. (2007). Complexity, Cost and Quality of Ecosystem Models and
Their Impact On Resilience: A Comparative Analysis, With Emphasis On Marine
Mammals and the Gulf Of St. Lawrence . Vancouver, BC: University of British
Columbia.
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2020a). El Niño/Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) Technical Discussion. NOAA.gov. Available online at: https:
//www.ncdc.noaa.gov/teleconnections/enso/enso-tech.php (accessed February
2020).
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (2020b). The El Niño
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) is one of the most important climatic phenomena
on Earth. NOAA.gov . Available online at: https://www.noaa.gov/education/
resource-collections/weather-atmosphere-education-resources/el-nino
(accessed February 2020).
Neira, S., Moloney, C. L., Cury, P., Mullon, C., and Christensen, V. (2009).
Mechanisms aﬀecting recovery in an upwelling food web: the case of the
southern Humboldt. Prog. Oceanogr. 83, 404ñ416. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2009.
07.007
Palomares, M.-L. D., and Pauly, D. (2019). “Coastal ﬁsheries: the past, present, and
possible futures, ” inCoasts and Estuaries, eds E. Wolanski, J. W. Day, M. Elliott,
and R. Ramachandran (Amsterdam: Elsevier), 569ñ576. doi: 10.1016/b978-0-
12-814003-1.00032-0
Pichegru, L., Ryan, P. G., Crawford, R. J. M., van der Lingen, C. D., and
Grémillet, D. (2010). Behavioural inertia places a top marine predator at risk
from environmental change in the Benguela upwelling system. Mar. Biol. 157,
537ñ544. doi: 10.1007/s00227-009-1339-2
Proyecto Golfos (2013). Estado del Área Marina de Uso Múltiple Pacíﬁco Sur. Costa
Rica. 83.
Queiros, Q., Fromentin, J.-M., Gasset, E., Dutto, G., Huiban, C., Metral, L., et al.
(2019). Food in the Sea: size also matters for pelagic ﬁsh. Front. Mar. Sci. 6:385.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2019.00385
Quesada-Alpízar, M. A., and Morales-Ramírez, A. (2004). Comportamiento de las
masas de agua en el Golfo Dulce, Costa Rica durante El Niño (1997 - 1998).Rev.
Biol. Trop. 52, 95ñ103.
Roux, J.-P., van der Lingen, C. D., Gibbons, M. J., Moroﬀ, N. E., Shannon,
L. J., Smith, A. D., et al. (2013). Jellyﬁcation of marine ecosystems as a likely
consequence of overﬁshing small pelagic ﬁshes: lessons from the Benguela. Bull.
Mar. Sci. 89, 249ñ284. doi: 10.5343/bms.2011.1145
Runge, J. (1988). Should we expect a relationship between primary production
and ﬁsheries? The role of copepod dynamics as a ﬁlter of trophic variability.
Hydrobiologia 67, 61ñ71. doi: 10.1007/bf00026294
Sánchez-Jiménez, A., Fujitani, M., MacMillan, D. C., Schlüter, A., and Wolﬀ, M.
(2019). Connecting a trophic model and local ecological knowledge to improve
ﬁsheries management: the case of Gulf of Nicoya, Costa Rica. Front. Mar. Sci.
6:126. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2019.00126
Scott, E., Serpetti, N., Steenbeek, J., and Heymans, J. J. (2016). A stepwise ﬁtting
procedure for automated ﬁtting of ecopath with ecosim models. SoftwareX 5,
25ñ30. doi: 10.1016/j.softx.2016.02.002
Shannon, L., Neira, S., and Taylor, M. (2008). Comparing internal and external
drivers in the southern Benguela and the southern and northern Humboldt
upwelling ecosystems. Afr. J. Mar. Sci. 30, 63ñ84. doi: 10.2989/ajms.2008.30.
1.7.457
SINAC (2019). Estrategia Regional para el Manejo y Conservación de los Manglares
en el Golfo de Nicoya-Costa Rica 2019-2030. San José: SINAC.
Tam, J., Taylor, M. H., Blaskovic, V., Espinoza, P., Ballón, R. M., Díaz, E., et al.
(2008). Trophic modeling of the Northern Humboldt current ecosystem, Part
I: comparing trophic linkages under La Niña and El Niño conditions. Prog.
Oceanogr. 79, 352ñ365. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2008.10.007
Taylor, M. H., Tam, J., Blaskovic, V., Espinoza, P., Ballón, R. M., Wosnitza-
Mendo, C., et al. (2008a). Trophic modeling of the Northern Humboldt Current
Ecosystem, Part II: elucidating ecosystem dynamics from 1995 to 2004 with
a focus on the impact of ENSO. Prog. Oceanogr. 79, 366ñ378. doi: 10.1016/j.
pocean.2008.10.008
Taylor, M. H., Wolﬀ, M., Vadas, F., and Y amashiro, C. (2008b). Trophic
and environmental drivers of the Sechura Bay Ecosystem (Peru) over
an ENSO cycle. Helgol. Mar. Res. 62, 15ñ32. doi: 10.1007/s10152-007-
0093-4
Thrane, J.-E., Hessen, D. O., and Andersen, T. (2014). The absorption of light in
lakes: negative impact of dissolved organic carbon on primary productivity.
Ecosystems 17, 1040ñ1052. doi: 10.1007/s10021-014-9776-2
Travers, M., Watermeyer, K., Shannon, L., and Shin, Y.-J. (2010). Changes in
food web structure under scenarios of overﬁshing in the southern Benguela:
comparison of the Ecosim and OSMOSE modelling approaches. J. Mar. Syst.
79, 101ñ111. doi: 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2009.07.005
Trujillo, P., Cisneros-Montemayor, A. M., Harper, S., and Zeller, D. (2012).
Reconstruction of Costa Rica’s Marine Fisheries Catches (1950ñ2008).
Valette-Silver, N., and Scavia, D. (2003). Ecological Forecasting: New Tools for
Coastal and Ecosystem Management . NOAA Tech. Memo. NOS NCCOS 1.
Silver Spring, MD: NOAA.
Vargas, J. A. (1995). The Gulf of Nicoya estuary, Costa Rica: past, present, and
future cooperative research. Helgoländer Meeresuntersuchungen 49, 821ñ828.
doi: 10.1007/BF02368405
Vargas-Montero, M., and Freer, E. (2004). Harmful blooms of cyanobacteria
(Oscillatoriaceae) and dinoﬂagellates (Gymnodiniaceae) in the Golfo de Nicoya,
Costa Rica. Rev. Biol. Trop. 52, 121ñ125.
Ward, P., and Myers, R. A. (2005). Shifts in open-ocean ﬁsh communities
coinciding with the commencement of commercial ﬁshing. Ecology 86, 835ñ
847. doi: 10.1890/03-0746
Ward, R. D., Friess, D. A., Day, R. H., and MacKenzie, R. A. (2016). Impacts of
climate change on mangrove ecosystems: a region by region overview. Ecosyst.
Health Sustain. 2:e01211. doi: 10.1002/ehs2.1211
Wolf, R., and Heuschele, J. (2018). Water browning inﬂuences the behavioral
eﬀects of ultraviolet radiation on zooplankton. Front. Ecol. Evol. 6:26. doi:
10.3389/fevo.2018.00026
Wolﬀ, M. (2010). Galapagos does not show recent warming but increased
seasonality. Galapagos Res. 67, 38ñ44.
Wolﬀ, M., Koch, V., Chavarria, J. B., and Vargas, J. A. (1998). A trophic ﬂow model
of the Golfo de Nicoya, Costa Rica. Rev. Biol. Trop. 46, 63ñ80.
Wolﬀ, M., Ruiz, D. J., and Taylor, M. (2012). El Niño induced changes to the Bolivar
Channel ecosystem (Galapagos): comparing model simulations with historical
biomass time series. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 448, 7ñ22. doi: 10.3354/Meps09542
Wolﬀ, M., Wosnitza-Mendo, C., and Mendo, J. (2003). “The Humboldt Currentó
trends in exploitation, protection and research, ” in Large Mar. Ecosyst. World
Trends Exploit. Prot. Res. , eds G. Hempel and K. Sherman (Netherlands:
Elsevier), 279ñ309.
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Alms and Wolﬀ. This is an open-access article distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
author(s) and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication
in this journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use,
distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 14 August 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 707