Original Article
Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation on
ﬁsheries catches into Ecopath
Lyndsay Clavareau 1,2*, Martin P. Marzloff 1, Verena M. Trenkel 2, Catherine M. Bulman 3,
Sophie Gourguet 4, Bertrand Le Gallic 5, Pierre-Yves Hernvann 6,7, Clara Pe´ron8, Nicolas Gasco 8,
Johanna Faure8, and Paul Tixier 9
1De´partement Oce´anographie et Dynamique des Ecosyste`mes, Ifremer, 1625, route de Sainte-Anne, Plouzane´ 29280, France
2De´partement Ressources, Biologies et Environnement, Ifremer, rue de l’ıˆ le d’Yeu, Nantes Cedex 3 44311, France
3CSIRO Oceans & Atmosphere, GPO Box 1538, Hobart, TAS 7001, Australia
4Ifremer, University of Brest, CNRS, UMR 6308, AMURE, Unite´ d’Economie Maritime, IUEM, rue Dumont d’Urville, Plouzane ´ 29280, France
5Universite´ Brest, Ifremer, CNRS, UMR 6308, AMURE, IUEM, France
6Ifremer, Unite´ de Sciences et Technologies Halieutiques, Laboratoire de Technologie et Biologie Halieutiques, Lorient 56100, France
7ESE, Ecology and Ecosystems Health, Institut Agro, Agrocampus Ouest, 65, rue de Saint-Brieuc, Rennes 35042, France
8Laboratoire de Biologie des Organismes et E´cosyste`mes Aquatiques (BOREA), Muse´um national d’Histoire naturelle, CNRS, UCN, IRD, SU, UA, CP
26, 43, rue Cuvier, Paris 75005, France
9School of Life and Environmental Sciences , Deakin University, Geelong, Burwood, VIC 3125, Australia
*Corresponding author: tel: þ33(0)2 29 00 85 76; e-mail: lyndsay.clavareau@ifremer.fr.
Clavareau, L., Marzloff, M. P., Trenkel, V. M., Bulman, C. M., Gourguet, S., Le Gallic, B. , Hernvann, P.-Y., Pe ´ron, C., Gasco, N., Faure, J., and
Tixier, P. Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation on ﬁsheries catches into Ecopath. – ICES Journal of Marine Science,
77: 3153–3167.
Received 9 July 2020; revised 29 September 2020; accepted 20 October 2020; advance access publication 25 November 2020.
Ecosystem-based approaches are increasingly used in ﬁsheries management to account for the direct trophic impacts of ﬁsh population har-
vesting. However, ﬁsheries can also indirectly alter ecosystem structure and functioning, for instance via the provision of new feeding opportu-
nities to marine predators. For instance, marine depredation, where predators feed on ﬁshery catches on ﬁshing gear, is a behaviour
developed by many marine species globally. This behaviour can modify both the ecological role of predators and ﬁsheries performance. Yet,
these ecosystem-wide effects of depredation are rarely considered holistically. In this study, we explored different ways of incorporating depre-
dation into an Ecopath trophic model. We assessed, through a subantarctic case study, how three alternative model structures can account
for depredation effects on ﬁshery catches, predator and non-commercial prey populations, as well as target ﬁsh stocks. While none adequately
addresses all facets of depredation, the alternative models can to some extent capture how depredation can lead to increased ﬁshing pressure
on stocks. As structural speciﬁcities of Ecopath prevented us from representing other depredation effects such as provisioning effects for pred-
ator populations, we conclude this study with a set of guidance to effectively capture the complex effects of depredation in marine ecosys-
tems and ﬁsheries models.
Keywords: Crozet, depredation, Ecopath, ecosystem model, Kerguelen, marine predators, model structure
Introduction
Fisheries can alter the structure and the functioning of marine
ecosystems through multiple direct and indirect pathways
(Hall, 1999 ). While resource extraction is a primary driver of
change in trophic interactions, ﬁsheries may also provide new
feeding opportunities in the form of resource subsidies for some
VC International Council for the Exploration of the Sea 2020. All rights reserved.
For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com
ICES Journal of Marine Science (2020), 77(7-8), 3153–3167. doi:10.1093/icesjms/fsaa219
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

predators. These food subsidies can lead to new interactions be-
tween species in marine ecosystems and involve discards as well
as the target resource itself, which, when caught on ﬁshing gear,
may represent an easy-to-catch prey for a broad range of large
marine predators ( Votier et al., 2010). In fact, and concomitantly
with the global expansion of ﬁsheries over the past 60 years, many
large marine predator species, primarily sharks, and marine
mammals have begun feeding on ﬁshery catches as a new way of
acquiring food ( Read, 2008; Mitchell et al., 2018).
This behaviour, termed “depredation”, has been reported glob-
ally in coastal and offshore ﬁsheries across all sectors (industrial,
artisanal, and recreational) and a range of ﬁshing techniques in-
cluding traps, nets, and hooks-and-lines ( Northridge, 1984 ;
Gilman et al. , 2007 ; Mitchell et al. , 2018 ). Depredation is a type
of human wildlife interaction that impacts many components of
socio-ecosystems including ﬁsheries and human ﬁshing commu-
nities, depredating species, exploited ﬁsh stocks, and other eco-
system components ( Northridge, 2018 ). From the many impacts
that have been studied in marine or terrestrial systems, four main
theoretical pathways are likely to simultaneously modify ecosys-
tem structure and dynamics: (i) provisioning: depredation
improves ﬁtness of depredating individuals through a facilitated
access to prey, subsequently enhancing predator populations
(Oro et al. , 2013 ; Tixier et al. , 2015 ); (ii) alteration of predation
pressures: depredation modiﬁes the role of predators by displacing
their foraging efforts and prey preferences ( Newsome et al. ,
2015); (iii) decrease in ﬁshing performance : removals of ﬁsh from
gear by predators reduce catch rates of ﬁshers; and (iv) increased
ﬁshing pressure on stocks : ﬁshers increase their ﬁshing effort to
compensate for catch losses caused by predators ( Peterson et al. ,
2013).
Because depredation can induce complex changes in marine
socio-ecosystem dynamics, it is essential for ecosystem-based ﬁsh-
eries management to account for this behaviour. While
ecosystem-based ﬁsheries management is increasingly supported
by a suite of modelling approaches, especially trophic modelling
(Hollowed, 2000 ) using Ecopath ( Plaga´nyi and Butterworth,
2004), Atlantis ( Fulton et al. , 2011 ), or diverse size- ( Blanchard
et al., 2014) or traits-based models ( Jacobsen et al., 2017; Trenkel,
2018), to date, none have incorporated depredation on ﬁshery
catches. In fact, very few studies have examined the effects of dep-
redation through holistic approaches. The primary reason for not
incorporating depredation in ecosystem models lies in the ab-
sence of consensus on how to conceptually or mathematically
capture this form of interaction at the interface between ecologi-
cal and human components. For example, in Ecopath models,
ecological groups and human activities are independently repre-
sented, as like other ecosystem models, Ecopath originally focused
on food webs and trophic ﬂows ( Fulton et al. , 2003 ). By essence,
this constitutes a structural hurdle to capture depredation as a
behaviour-mediated interaction emerging at the interface be-
tween marine populations and ﬁsheries. Indeed, the Ecopath
model architecture lacks ﬂexibility to easily capture depredation
given that, on the one hand, ecological interactions (i.e. preda-
tion) between species or functional groups are captured via a diet
matrix while, on the other hand, ﬁshing extracts target species
biomass from the system. Nevertheless, inclusion of depredation
in ecosystem models appears as an essential challenge to tackle,
given that this behaviour likely changes food-web structure with
subsequent consequences on ecosystem dynamics.
Here, we explore ways of incorporating depredation into the
user-friendly and widespread Ecopath modelling framework
(Christensen et al., 2008). Using a subantarctic case study of ma-
rine mammal depredation on commercial ﬁsheries ( Roche et al. ,
2007), we assessed how three alternative model formulations can
capture the ecosystem-level effects of depredation. Relative to a
baseline model that did not include depredation, we speciﬁcally
compared how effectively each model captured consequences of
depredation in terms of: (i) changes in ﬁshing and predation
mortalities on target species, (ii) mutual impacts of depredation-
related groups (i.e. depredating, target species, and ﬁshery), and
(iii) broader ecosystem-level consequences.
Material and methods
Ecopath modelling framework
The Ecopath framework models biomasses and trophic ﬂows
within an ecosystem assuming a mass-balanced equilibrium for a
given time period ( Ecopath.org, Christensen and Walters, 2004 ).
Ecopath models capture interactions between species or func-
tional groups, i.e. groups of species that share similar ecological
roles ( Piroddi et al. , 2015 ). In Ecopath, functional groups are
modelled as producers, consumers, or detritus with no dynamics.
Groups may be further sub-divided according to life stages
(multi-stanza) (Christensen and Walters, 2004 ). Fisheries are rep-
resented using a dedicated formalism that allows for catches to be
distributed between landings and discards.
Two master Ecopath equations describe biomass ﬂows between
functional groups. Equation (1) deﬁnes the total biological pro-
duction (P)
i of functional group i as:
ðP=BÞi /C2 Bi ¼
Yi þ P
j Bj /C2ð Q=BÞj /C2 DCji þ Ei þ BAi
EEi
;
(1)
where (P/B)i is the production ( P) to biomass ( B) ratio for func-
tional group i; EEi is the ecotrophic efﬁciency, i.e. losses other
than through predation and ﬁshing; Yi is the ﬁshery yield, ( Q/B)j
is the consumption ( Q) to biomass ( B) ratio for predator j, DCij
is the proportion of group i in the diet of predator j, Ei is the net
migration rate for group i (immigration–emigration; here set to
zero for all groups), and BAi is the biomass accumulation rate
(Christensen et al., 2008; Piroddi et al., 2015).
The second equation calculates biomass consumption of con-
sumer group i as the sum of group biomass production, loss via
respiration processes ( R) modulated by the amount of unassimi-
lated food ( GS):
Qi ¼ Pi þ Ri
1 /C0 GSi
: (2)
Assuming the modelled ecosystem is at equilibrium over the
study period, the Ecopath software estimates unknown parame-
ters to achieve mass balance ( Christensen and Walters, 2004 ;
Piroddi et al., 2015). While ﬁsheries landings and discards as well
as diet composition of each functional group are speciﬁed from
available data, P/B, Q/B, and P/C ratios, equilibrium biomasses,
3154 L. Clavareau et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

and ecotrophic efﬁciency ( EE) of model groups are often esti-
mated by Ecopath.
Modelling depredation
As a complex behaviour-mediated interaction between ﬁshers
and depredating species, depredation can induce a range of direct
and indirect effects, including:
(i) Enhancing physiological performance of the depredating spe-
cies via a facilitated access to food resources . The depredated
resource has a high-energy content for the depredating spe-
cies as prey catching and handling only require limited ef-
fort (Tixier et al., 2015);
(ii) Kleptoparasitism (Northridge, 2018): Removal of ﬁsh caught
on ﬁshing gear induces extra costs to ﬁshers while beneﬁting
to depredating species as described in (i);
(iii) Additional ﬁshing pressure on the exploited and depredated
ﬁsh population: This only occurs when ﬁshers deploy extra
ﬁshing effort to maintain their total catch despite the re-
duced yields ( Gilman et al., 2007; Tixier et al., 2015; Werner
et al., 2015);
(iv) Released predation pressure on other prey groups: By access-
ing a new food source, the depredating species decreases the
extent to which they feed on other food sources ( Gilman
et al., 2007).
The above list of potential short-term depredation effects is not
comprehensive as indirect long-term effects encompass, among
others, a range of potential socio-economic consequences to
ﬁsheries.
This study aimed at capturing complex depredation-related
effects within the Ecopath modelling framework. Note that, to
date, Ecopath models can only represent three types of variables,
namely: detritus groups, functional groups, and ﬁsheries.
Because depredating species cannot directly feed on ﬁsheries
catches in Ecopath, and to avoid nonsensical assumptions in
terms of population dynamics, we decided to explicitly capture
depredated ﬁsh biomass as a detritus group consumed by the
depredating species. We proposed three alternative model formu-
lations to incorporate this “depredated target species” detritus
group into a baseline Ecopath model that does not capture depre-
dation (Figure 1).
(1) Baseline model: In this baseline model, depredation is ig-
nored and only the natural predatory behaviour of depredat-
ing species is incorporated. Fishing of the target species
produces landings and discards, and natural predation inter-
actions are based on the diet matrix ( Figure 1a).
(2) Food subsidy model: This model explicitly captures that dep-
redation can act as a food subsidy for the depredating spe-
cies. The “depredated target species” detritus group
represents the depredated biomass of the target species,
which is entirely consumed by the depredating species. Here,
we distribute the total diet contribution of the target species
to the depredating species (as deﬁned in the baseline case)
between the proportion of depredation from the “depredated
target species” and the proportion of natural predation on
the “target species”. Thus, we assume that the overall contri-
bution of the target species to the depredating species diet
(both via predation and depredation) is unchanged relative
to the baseline model. Followingly, proportional contribu-
tions of other preys to depredating species diet, as well as the
diet matrix for all other groups, remain unchanged. We as-
sumed that the distribution of target species across the three
target species life stages (see below) was similar in the depre-
dated fraction and in the landings.
(3) Increased ﬁshing effort model: By including depredated bio-
mass into commercial ﬁshery discards, this model captures
an overall increase in the caught biomass of target species,
which now accounts for the sum of landings, discards as well
as biomass of catch removed from the ﬁshing gear by the
depredating species. Both commercial ﬁshery discards and
depredated biomass then feed into two distinct detritus
groups, the “organic matter” and the “depredated target spe-
cies”, respectively. The “depredated target species” contrib-
utes to depredating species diet as described above for the
food subsidy model ( Figure 1c ). Conversely to the food sub-
sidy model, this formulation explicitly captures that depre-
dating species feed on ﬁsheries catches.
(4) Competing ﬁshery model: By representing depredation as an
additional ﬁshery (distinct from the commercial ﬁshery),
this model does not only account for additional ﬁshing pres-
sure on target species due to depredation but also explicitly
capture competition between ﬁshers and depredating species.
As in the increased ﬁshing effort model, the “depredation”
ﬁshery discards all its catches into the “depredated target
species” that is consumed by the depredating species group
(as described above for other models). The commercial ﬁsh-
ery produces landings and discards ( Figure 1d ). In this
model, the target species group is thus exposed to two com-
peting ﬁsheries (i.e. the commercial and the depredation
ﬁshery).
Comparison of alternative model formulations
We compared how the alternative model formulations, which re-
spectively account for depredation as (i) food subsidy , (ii) in-
creased ﬁshing effort , or (iii) competing ﬁshery , capture
depredation effects relative to the b aseline model with no depre-
dation. To facilitate model comparison, all P/B and Q/B ratios es-
timated for the baseline model, as well as other input parameters
(i.e. biomass, diet matrix) were kept constant across all models,
except for model-speciﬁc adaptations as presented above (section
“Modelling depredation”). Therefore, for each model, only the
biomass of toothﬁsh groups (represented as a multi-stanza popu-
lation) was re-estimated by Ecopath, keeping the biomass of the
small adult stanza ﬁxed.
Quantitative comparison of the three alternative depredation
model formulations relative to the baseline model relied on three
complementary metrics: predation mortality, ﬁshing mortality,
and mixed trophic impact. These metrics were chosen to assess
changes in: (1) ﬁshing and predation mortality on target species,
(2) mutual impacts of the groups directly involved in depredation
(i.e. depredating, target species and ﬁshery), and (3) ecosystem
impacts of depredating species.
Changes in predation mortality are expected to reﬂect release
in natural predation due to depredating species switching diet to
feed on ﬁsheries catches of the same species. Predation mortality
(M2) corresponds to the sum of all mortalities due to all n preda-
tor groups feeding on prey group i, as follows:
Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation into Ecopath
3155
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

Figure 1. Schematic representations of alternative Ecopath model structures for including depredation on a target species. (a) Baseline
model: no depredation; (b) food subsidy model: depredated biomass is represented as a detritus group, (c) i ncreased ﬁshing effort model:
depredation incorporated into the commercial ﬁshery, and (d) competing ﬁshery model: depredation is an independent ﬁshery. L, landings
biomass; D, discards biomass; De, depredated biomass; PD, depredating species population biomass; PT, target species population biomass.
3156 L. Clavareau et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

M2i ¼
Xn
j¼1
Qj /C2 DCji ; (3)
where Qj is the total consumption rate of predating group j (2),
and DCij is the fraction of group i in the diet of predator j. Qj is
calculated as the product of Bj, the biomass of group j, and Qj/Bj
is the consumption/biomass ratio for group j (Christensen et al. ,
2008, Piroddi et al., 2015).
The mortality due to ﬁshing is calculated either as (i) the sum
of landings and discards divided by the biomass of the target
group in the baseline and food subsidy models or (ii) the sum of
landings, discards, and depredated biomass divided by target
group biomass in the increased ﬁshing effort and competing ﬁshery
models.
Finally, changes in mixed trophic impacts (referred to as
“impacts” hereafter) summarize how alternative formulations
modify the cascading effects of depredation-related groups on
other model groups. The mixed trophic impact indicates how a
long-term increase in a given group biomass can affect the equi-
librium biomass of other groups via all direct and indirect feed-
back loops ( Ulanowicz and Puccia, 1990 ). The impact indicator is
a matrix whose ij
th element represents the interaction between the
impacting group i and the impacted group j. This indicator con-
siders ﬁsheries as predators, which means landings and discards
correspond to their prey intake in the model ( Christensen et al. ,
2008; Piroddi et al., 2015).
Case study
The commercial longline ﬁshery operating in the Exclusive
Economic Zones of Kerguelen and Crozet Islands (French sub-
antarctic islands located between 45 and 50
/C14 S and 49 and 71 /C14 E) is
conducted by seven licenced vessels and targets Patagonian tooth-
ﬁsh ( Dissostichus eleginoides ) (hereafter “toothﬁsh” —Guinet
et al. , 2015 ). As the ﬁshery holds the largest quota for that ﬁsh
species across subantarctic waters, it is also the ﬁshery most af-
fected by depredation. Killer whales ( Orcinus orca ) and sperm
whales (Physeter macrocephalus) are the two primary depredating
species, together removing an estimated 279 t of toothﬁsh per
year at Crozet and 250 t per year at Kerguelen, equivalent to 30
and 6% of the total catches, in the two areas, respectively ( Gasco
et al., 2015; Tixier et al., 2020).
Our Ecopath models represented the marine ecosystem of
Crozet and Kerguelen in 2017. The two areas were considered as
a single area for highly mobile species, such as sharks, birds, and
some marine mammals. For less mobile groups, such as benthic
groups, which are similar at the community level but do show
differences at the species level, especially among benthic ﬁsh, be-
tween Crozet and Kerguelen ( Duhamel et al., 2005), the food web
was duplicated for each of the two areas (i.e. area-speciﬁc groups
as used in Piroddi et al., 2017). Similarly, two longline ﬁsheries—
Kerguelen ﬁshery and Crozet ﬁshery—were incorporated to ac-
count for the large differences in catches between the two areas
(80% of the total quota was caught at Kerguelen). A total of 59
functional groups were considered in the model: 38 area-speciﬁc
groups and 21 groups shared between Crozet and Kerguelen
(Figure 2; Supplementary Table S1 ).
Toothﬁsh was modelled as three weight-based stanza for each
area to represent different life stages of the species: juveniles
(<2 kg), small (2–5 kg), and large adults ( >5 kg). Sperm whales
extensively depredate on toothﬁsh catches both at Crozet and
Kerguelen, but individuals are strongly segregated between the
two areas (Tixier et al., 2019a). Therefore, this species was divided
into two area-speciﬁc groups in the model. Unlike sperm whales,
killer whales depredate almost exclusively at Crozet ( Labadie
et al. , 2018 ). Although two killer whale morphotypes occur at
Crozet and are both observed depredating on toothﬁsh catches
(Tixier et al., 2016), only the so-called “Crozet killer whales” were
presented in the study due to the lack of information on the other
morphotype (type D). Abundance estimates for killer whales were
taken from Tixier et al. (2017) and those for sperm whales from
Labadie et al. (2018). The natural diet of sperm whales was as-
sumed to be mostly composed of cephalopods and, to a lesser ex-
tent, of adult toothﬁsh ( Clarke, 1980 ; Cherel and Duhamel,
2004). For the Crozet killer whales, natural prey included pinni-
peds, whales, penguins, and toothﬁsh ( Tixier et al. , 2019b ).
Population size estimates and diet compositions for all pinnipeds
and bird populations were derived from Guinet et al. (1996) and
Cherel et al. (2004), as well as from expert consultation. Data for
the remaining functional groups were taken from the literature
and from previously developed Ecopath models for Kerguelen,
the Falkland Islands, and the Antarctic Peninsula ( Pruvost et al. ,
2005). Species were generally aggregated into functional groups
when sharing similar trophic and ecological niches. However,
species caught by the ﬁshery, including both target and bycatch
species, were modelled separately. The main bycatch species of
the toothﬁsh ﬁshery at Crozet and Kerguelen represent /C24 6% of
the total catches and are grenadiers ( Macrourus spp.), blue anti-
mora ( Antimora rostrata ), and whiteleg skate ( Amblyraja taaf )a t
Crozet and kerguelen sandpaper skate ( Bathyraja irrasa ) and
eaton’s skate ( Bathyraja eatonii ) at Kerguelen. Blue antimora is
fully discarded, while the other species are partly or fully retained
(CCAMLR, 2018a , b). As this work primarily focused on inclu-
sion of depredation, the Ecopath models neglected ﬁsheries by-
catch given their marginal volumes in the French Patagonian
toothﬁsh ﬁshery. Full details on model parameterization are pro-
vided in the Supplementary material.
Data on ﬁshery catches, including both landings and discards,
were collected by the French Southern Ocean Fishery Observer
Program ( Gasco, 2011 ) and extracted from the “PECHEKER”
database ( Martin and Pruvost, 2007 ; Pruvost et al. , 2011 ).
Toothﬁsh population estimates were obtained from spawning
stock biomass estimates ( Massiot-Granier et al. , 2019a , b).
Depredation rates were set at 30% of the total catches for Crozet
and 2% of the total catches at Kerguelen as estimated for 2017
following the methodology used by Gasco et al. (2015). Further
details on the data used are available in Supplementary Table S2 .
For clarity, we primarily present the results from the Crozet re-
gion hereafter.
Results
Fishing and predation mortality
Relative to the baseline model, ﬁshing mortality was unchanged
in the food subsidy model but increased by /C24 15% in the increased
ﬁshing effort and the competing ﬁshery models (Figure 3a). The in-
crease relative to the baseline model was equal across all toothﬁsh
stages in the competing ﬁshery model and varied from 14.9% (ju-
venile toothﬁsh) to 15.2% (large toothﬁsh) in the increased ﬁshing
effort model.
Natural predation mortality on toothﬁsh decreased simlarly by
<3% in all food subsidy , increased ﬁshing effort ,a n d competing
Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation into Ecopath 3157
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

ﬁshery models relative to the baseline model. The maximum rela-
tive decline was 2.3% for small adult toothﬁsh ( Figure 3b ). For
other killer whale prey groups, natural predation mortality in-
creased by 0.4 to 0.6% in the food subsidy model, on ﬁltering ma-
rine mammal, and fur seals ( Arctocephalus spp.) and king penguins
(Aptenodytes patagonicus), respectively. Natural predation on other
prey groups did not change in the increased ﬁshing effort and the
competing ﬁshery models relative to the baseline model (Figure 4).
Note that this difference in the food subsidy model partially comes
from a /C24 1.8% increase in the equilibrium biomass of killer whales
relative to all other models. Except for this killer whale biomass in
the food subsidy model, equilibrium biomasses for all groups were
similar across all models. Despite similar input parameters set
evenly across all models, this slight change unexpectedly emerged
from mass-balancing the food subsidy model, possibly because it
did not include any feedback between “depredated target species”
and the commercial ﬁshery.
Mutual effects of depredation-related groups
Mixed trophic impacts of predators and ﬁsheries were overall
consistent across all depredation models, except for slight model-
speciﬁc differences: ﬁsheries activity, sperm whale natural preda-
tion and sperm whale depredation all positively impacted juvenile
toothﬁsh but were detrimental to larger life stages ( Figure 5 ).
Natural predation by killer whales positively impacted all tooth-
ﬁsh stages (Figure 5). The small toothﬁsh stage was negatively im-
pacted by ﬁshing and depredation, but only marginally positively
affected by killer whales natural predation ( Figure 5). In the com-
peting ﬁshery model, killer whales depredation positively impacted
small toothﬁsh life stages but negatively the two larger all tooth-
ﬁsh life stages ( Figure 5).
Except for the positive impact of killer whales ( þ/C24 0.03), dep-
redating species (i.e. sperm whales and in the competing ﬁshery
model the “depredation ﬁshery”, which includes depredation
from killer whales and sperm whales) were detrimental to the
toothﬁsh longline ﬁshery ( Figure 6). Sperm whales had the largest
negative impact on the commercial ﬁshery ( /C0 0.07 to /C0 0.08).
These negative impacts of depredating groups on the ﬁshery sug-
gest that the depredation models were able to capture losses in
ﬁshery performance due to depredation.
Impacts of the commercial ﬁshery were negative on all depre-
dating groups, with a stronger impact on sperm whales than killer
whales (i.e. /C0 0.04 and /C0 0.022, respectively; Figure 7). Note how-
ever that the “depredated toothﬁsh” component was estimated to
be beneﬁtial to both sperm ( þ/C24 0.004) and killer ( þ/C24 0.02)
whales (Figure 7).
Figure 2. Simpliﬁed ﬂow diagram of the baseline Ecopath model. Functional groups speciﬁc to Crozet are framed in orange, and those
occurring both around Crozet and Kerguelen Islands in blue. Figures in brackets correspond to the number of functional groups explicitly
deﬁned in the model. Focal groups of this study are highlighted in grey. Connections between longline and sperm and killer whales represent
depredation processes (which are included according to different formulations in the three depredation-speciﬁc models but excluded in the
baseline model).
3158 L. Clavareau et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

As a side result, we also observed marginal decreases in trophic
levels of the depredating species in the food subsidy, increased ﬁsh-
ing effort , and competing ﬁshery models relative to the baseline
model, by /C24 0.3% for sperm whales down to /C24 1.8% for killer
whales (Supplementary Figure S2).
Ecosystem effects of depredating species
Overall, impacts of killer whales (i.e. “killer whale” in the food
subsidy model and increased ﬁshing effort model, and both depre-
dating and naturally predating components in the competing ﬁsh-
ery model) were negative on most of their prey groups including
Figure 3. Effects of alternative Ecopath model formulation on Patagonian toothﬁsh ﬁshing (a) and natural predation (b) mortality. Estimates
from the three alternative depredation models are expressed relatively to the baseline model (no depredation). Models are numbered from 1
to 3: 1, food subsidy model; 2, increased ﬁshing effort model; 3, competing ﬁshery model. Toothﬁsh are modelled as three weight-based stages:
juveniles (<2.07 kg), small adults (2.07–5 kg), and large adults ( >5 kg).
Figure 4. Relative change in killer whale predation mortality rates on non-commercial prey groups across alternative depredation models
(relative to the baseline model with no depredation). Models are numbered from 1 to 3: 1, food subsidy model; 2, increased ﬁshing effort
model; 3, competing ﬁshery model.
Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation into Ecopath 3159
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

diving seabirds fur seals and elephant seals (females and pups,
Mirounga leonina) across all models ( Figure 8). Most prey groups,
including marine mammals and penguins, were marginally
(>0.1%) less negatively impacted by killer whales in the three al-
ternative depredation models relative to the baseline model. Due
to a direct release in natural predation pressure, killer whales
were estimated to positively impact all toothﬁsh groups
(Figure 8).
Larger impacts of sperm whales (absolute estimate of mixed
trophic impact >0.03; Figure 9 ) only concerned groups that are
directly related to the commercial ﬁshery, either because they are
involved in depredation (i.e. small and large toothﬁsh) or acci-
dently caught as bycatch such as blue antimora and whiteleg skate
(Figure 9). Sperm whale impacts varied slighlty across the alterna-
tive models and appeared to be marginally buffered in the in-
creased ﬁshing effort model.
The ecosystem effects of depredation captured by the different
Ecopath models are summarized in Table 1.
Discussion
Ecosystem models are pivotal tools to account for multiple driv-
ers of ecological systems, such as interactions between species (i.e.
predation, competition) and environmental conditions
(Hollowed, 2000; Plaga´nyi and Butterworth, 2004 ). They can also
include the effects of anthropogenic activities (e.g. harvesting),
which often leads to competition between natural populations
and humans. Because depredation generates a number of effects
beyond direct competition between humans and wildlife, which
have to date not received much attention in ecosystem modelling
frameworks ( Peterson et al. , 2013 ; Werner et al. , 2015 ), their
complex consequences on socio-ecosystem dynamics are not well
understood and remain challenging to anticipate. In the following
sections, we discuss how the alternative Ecopath model formula-
tions developed to explicitly represent depredation in a case study
can to some extent capture consequences of depredation on ma-
rine ecosystem structure and dynamics. Given the structural con-
straints of the Ecopath framework to represent complex
consequences of depredation at the interface between ﬁsheries
and marine predators, we also identify a number of limitations in
the proposed model formulations and provide guidance for fu-
ture research in ecosystem modelling to better capture the range
of socio-ecological effects associated with depredation.
A ﬁrst step towards model-based assessment of the eco-
system effects of depredation in marine systems
Our study provides the ﬁrst model-based assessment of the
system-level impacts of depredation in marine systems. By com-
paring three alternative depredation-explicit Ecopath model for-
mulations with a baseline model that neglects depredation
processes, we assess how including depredation can affect esti-
mates of ﬁshing mortality and predation pressure. In our models
of the Kerguelen/Crozet system, ﬁshing mortality increased with
Figure 5. Impact indicator of longline ﬁshery and depredating marine mammals on the three different toothﬁsh life stages in the four
Ecopath models, without depredation (0 for baseline model) and with depredation (1 for food subsidy model, 2 for i ncreased ﬁshing effort
model, and 3 for competing ﬁshery model). Toothﬁsh were modelled as three weight-based life stages: juveniles ( <2.07 kg; left panel), small
adults (2.07–5 kg; central panel), and large adults ( >5 kg; right panel). In the competing ﬁshery model, “depredation ﬁshery” corresponds to
depredation behaviour of sperm whale and killer whale, while “killer whale” and “sperm whale” refer to the naturally predating component of
these groups. In the two other depredation models, “killer whale” and “sperm whale” groups include both effects of depredation and natural
predation by these groups.
3160 L. Clavareau et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

Figure 6. Impact indicator of depredating marine mammal species on the Crozet longline ﬁshery. The “depredation ﬁshery” group
corresponds to toothﬁsh removed by sperm whale and killer whale. Models are numbered from 0 to 3: 0, baseline model with no
depredation; 1, food subsidy model; 2, increased ﬁshing effort model; 3, competing ﬁshery model. “Depredation ﬁshery” represents depredation
by both sperm and killer whales in competing ﬁshery model, while “killer whale” and “sperm whale” only represent natural predation by these
groups. In the two other depredation models, “killer whale” and “sperm whale” groups include both effects of depredation and natural
predation by these groups.
Figure 7. Mixed trophic impacts of the Crozet longline ﬁshery on the subgroups of depredating killer whales (left) and sperm whales (right).
Models are numbered from 0 to 3: 0, baseline model with no depredation; 1, food subsidy model; 2, increased ﬁshing effort model; 3, competing
ﬁshery model. “Depredation ﬁshery” represents depredation by both sperm and killer whales in competing ﬁshery model (but excludes the
naturally predating components of these groups).
Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation into Ecopath 3161
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

the inclusion of depredation, but changes in other indicators, in-
cluding predation mortality, were marginal.
By incorporating depredation as a part of ﬁshery catches, the
increased ﬁshing effort model and the competing ﬁshery model ex-
plicitly captured the increase in ﬁshing mortality induced by dep-
redation. Both models estimated a /C24 15% increase in ﬁshing
mortality due to toothﬁsh depredation by killer and sperm
whales. Since depredation has only been qualitatively reported to
increase ﬁshing mortality in other longline ﬁsheries ( Werner
et al. , 2015 ; Peterson and Hanselman, 2017 ), this result is note-
worthy. Because depredation can be a cryptic source of ﬁshing
mortality, it is not systematically detected (e.g. species depredat-
ing on ﬁshing gear at depth, when ﬁshers are away or leaving lim-
ited evidence when removing ﬁsh) and is only rarely quantiﬁed
(Tixier et al. , 2020 ), such estimates are necessary to improve the
accuracy of ﬁsh stock assessments and hence to support sustain-
able ﬁshery management ( Gilman et al., 2013). However, our esti-
mate of increased ﬁshing mortality due to depredation is case
speciﬁc and method dependent. First, the French toothﬁsh ﬁshery
operates in a remote region, where only a small ﬂeet (seven ves-
sels) targets a commercially valuable stock that was unexploited
until the 1970s ( Duhamel and Williams, 2011 ). While depreda-
tion increased ﬁshing mortality by 15%, the estimated depredated
biomass ( /C24 279 t per year; Tixier et al. , 2020 ) only represents a
minor fraction (possibly 1%) of the estimated population bio-
mass used for the model. Although this suggests a limited impact
Figure 8. Killer whale mixed trophic impact on all functional groups in the Crozet ecosystem. Only large effects (absolute value >0.03) are
shown. Estimates are provided for each models, which are numbered from 0 to 3: 0, baseline model with no depredation; 1, food subsidy
model; 2, increased ﬁshing effort model; 3, competing ﬁshery model (where “3DS” and “3DF” distinguish between the impact of the
“depredating species” group and the “depredating ﬁshery”, respectively). “Depredation ﬁshery” represents depredation by both sperm and
killer whales in competing ﬁshery model, while “killer whale” and “sperm whale” only represent the natural predation by these groups. In the
two other depredation models, “killer whale” and “sperm whale” groups include both depredation and natural predation effects of these
groups. Functional group preceded by * is part of killer whales diet.
Figure 9. Sperm whale mixed trophic impacts on all functional
groups in Crozet ecosystem. Only large effects (absolute value
>0.03) are shown. Estimates are provided for each models, which
are numbered from 0 to: 0, baseline model with no depredation; 1,
food subsidy model; 2, increased ﬁshing effort model; 3, competing
ﬁshery model (where “3DS” and “3DF” distinguish between the
impact of the “depredating species” group and the “depredating
ﬁshery”, respectively). “Depredation ﬁshery” represents depredation
by both sperm and killer whales in competing ﬁshery model, while
“killer whale” and “sperm whale” only represent the natural
predation by these groups. In the two other depredation models,
“killer whale” and “sperm whale” groups include both depredation
and natural predation effects of these groups. Functional group
preceded by * is part of sperm whales diet.
3162 L. Clavareau et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

of depredation on toothﬁsh in this region, a similar increase in
ﬁshing mortality in response to depredation may have a greater
impact in other regions where stocks have been heavily exploited.
Indeed, ﬁshery catches represent a higher proportion of the de-
pleted stock biomass in intensively exploited stocks so any further
increase in ﬁshing effort (for instance due to depredation) could
have severe impacts for fully or over-exploited stocks. Here, the
subantarctic longline ﬁshery, which operates in a remote hard-to-
access area and is well-regulated, exploits a rather abundant stock
so we can assume that the estimated 15% increase in ﬁshing mor-
tality due to depredation is not too critical for toothﬁsh stock sus-
tainability. Moreover, changes in ﬁshing mortality in a
depredation-impacted system may depend on whether ﬁshers can
increase their ﬁshing effort to recoup catch losses. Fisheries with
different management systems and more restrictive ﬁshing sea-
sons may offer fewer opportunities to compensate for depreda-
tion losses. For instance, in South Georgia where the toothﬁsh
ﬁshery is also subject to killer and sperm whale depredation, ﬁsh-
ing is restricted to winter months only ( Towers et al., 2019).
In the proposed depredation-explicit models, depredation only
induced a marginal release in predation pressure on natural prey
species of depredating sperm whales and killer whales. All alterna-
tive models predicted a slight decrease of /C24 2% in direct predation
of both killer and sperm whales on toothﬁsh. Note that this di-
rectly results from the assumption that the total consumption of
toothﬁsh by whales at Crozet remained unchanged, in relation to
the study of Tixier et al. (2019b), which found no difference be-
tween the contribution of toothﬁsh to the diet of depredating and
non-depredating killer whales, i.e. that natural predation on
toothﬁsh was partially replaced by depredation on toothﬁsh
catches. Toothﬁsh is a natural prey of sperm whales but is likely
to only marginally contribute to their diet that is largely domi-
nated by cephalopods, as evidenced in Antarctic waters ( Yukhov,
1972). As such, access to toothﬁsh on ﬁshing gear likely increases
the contribution of this prey in the diet of individuals engaging in
depredation, subsequently releasing predatory pressures of these
individuals on other of their primary cephalopod prey species.
However, the extent to which this release, which may be spatially
restricted to areas where ﬁshing occurs and depend on the pro-
portion of depredating individuals in the sperm whale
population, alters the full ecosystem is still unknown. Cascading
impacts are likely greater when depredated species are naturally
mostly absent from their diet, as is the case for harbour seals
(Phoca vitulina ) depredating eels from fyke-nets in Sweden
(Lundstro¨m et al., 2010).
The magnitude of predation release on wild prey may not only
depend on the importance of the depredated species for a preda-
tor’s natural diet but also on the predator’s trophic position, pop-
ulation abundance, and the extent to which it gains energy from
depredation. Most species depredating on ﬁshery catches are
higher trophic level species such as large sharks and marine mam-
mals, and changes in predation pressures from these top-
predators are likely to generate greater top-down cascading eco-
system effects than changes from meso-predators ( Newsome
et al. , 2015 ). Population size and energetic requirements of the
depredating species, paired with the energetic value of the depre-
dated ﬁsh, will dictate its overall consumption.
Inclusion of depredation in Ecopath: limitations and
recommendations
While the depredation-explicit models to some extent capture in-
crease in ﬁshing pressure and release in predation pressures as
consequences of depredation, a range of other processes (for in-
stance facilitated access to food resources for predators, or de-
crease in ﬁshing gear capturability) were not accurately captured
(if at all) in these models. These limitations in the proposed
model formulations are largely due to structural constraints of
the Ecopath modelling framework.
Facilitated access to prey, which can potentially enhance depre-
dating species’ individual and population performance, was par-
tially incorporated via two modelling tricks: (1) by adding a
speciﬁc “depredated target species” detritus group and (ii), conse-
quently, by separating out depredation from natural predation on
target species. However, depredation was only linked to the com-
mercial ﬁshery as a “discard” component in the increased ﬁshing
effort and in the competing ﬁshery models because catches cannot
appear in the diet matrix in Ecopath. These alternative model
structures theoretically allow for a positive impact of depredated
ﬁsh biomass on depredating species. However, this positive im-
pact does not capture how reduced foraging effort due to
Table 1. Summary of results across the alternative Ecopath models applied to the longline ﬁsheries around Crozet Island.
Effect in model Fig
Model
Baseline Food subsidy Increased ﬁshing effort Competing ﬁshery
Longline ﬁshing pressure (landings þ discards) on toothﬁsh 3   
Decrease in predation pressure on toothﬁsh (free swimming
individuals) by depredating species due to depredation
3  
Increase in ﬁshing effort due to depredation by killer whales
and sperm whales on toothﬁsh
3–5 
Decrease in predation pressure on other natural preys of
depredating killer whales and sperm whales
4X
Competition for toothﬁsh (free swimming) between depredating
killer whales, sperm whales, and ﬁshers
6–7   
Competition for hooked toothﬁsh between depredating killer
whales and sperm whales and ﬁshers
6–7 X 
Prey access facilitation by ﬁshery for depredating by killer
whales and sperm whales
7 
Blank ﬁelds mean that the effect was not detected for a given model, a  means that the effect was found, and X denotes that a model produced the opposite
effect.
Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation into Ecopath 3163
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

facilitated access to food resource can enhance certain life history
parameters of the depredating species (i.e. life expectancy, fecun-
dity, or growth; Tixier et al. , 2015 ). To achieve this, it would be
necessary to increase the assimilation rate of depredated resources
relative to predation and adapt information about population
growth rate (i.e. P/B).
Adding “depredated target species” as an additional detritus
group in Ecopath allows the partial incorporation of two separate
depredation effects (i.e. release of predation pressure and facili-
tated access to food resources), but it skews estimates of trophic
levels in the model. For instance, representing the depredated bio-
mass as a detritus group directly leads to an underestimation of
the depredating species’ trophic level in Ecopath, given that detri-
tus groups are assigned a basal trophic level ( ¼ 1) in Ecopath
(Christensen et al. , 2008 ). Thus, caution should be exercised
when using a depredation-explicit model to study trophic levels
in Ecopath. In the Crozet/Kerguelen case study, a reduction in
the depredating species’ trophic levels is unrealistic since the dep-
redated ﬁsh, toothﬁsh, is among the highest trophic levels well
above most other natural prey items of killer and sperm whales
(Tixier et al. , 2019a ). Similarly, a decrease in trophic level would
seem misleading in many other depredation cases, such as in the
wide-ranging tropical longline ﬁsheries where sharks and odonto-
cetes heavily depredate on high trophic level groups (i.e. tuna and
swordﬁsh; Rabearisoa et al. , 2018 ). Moreover, depredation-
related changes in trophic level are likely to depend on predator
switching their diet preferences towards the easily accessible re-
source (rather than foraging for their natural preys; Jacoby et al. ,
1999). While trophic levels of depredating species at Crozet/
Kerguelen should remain unchanged under the assumption that
their overall toothﬁsh consumption is not changed by depreda-
tion, trophic levels of depredating species are most likely to in-
crease as the proportional contribution of depredation in their
diet increases ( Jacoby et al., 1999 ). Conversely, species increasing
their consumption of low trophic level prey when depredating, as
evidenced in cases where predators remove bait from ﬁshing gears
(e.g. Thode et al., 2016) are likely to decrease their trophic level.
Decline in ﬁshery performance could not be fully captured in
any of the models. Indeed, none of the three depredation-explicit
models explicitly captured depredation as a loss in gear captur-
ability and/or as an extra cost to the ﬁshery but rather represent
depredated biomass as discards recycled by the depredating spe-
cies. While the competing ﬁshery model incorporated depredation
as a virtual ﬁshery to capture the supplementary negative effect of
killer and sperm whales on the ﬁshery via the removal of catches
from ﬁshing gear, it did not explicitly quantify energy gains for
the depredating species and efﬁciency loss for the ﬁshery.
Moreover, model realism also depends on data availability, which
represents a major limitation of any ecosystem model. For in-
stance, in our case, a single virtual ﬁshery represented toothﬁsh
biomass depredated by both sperm whales and killer whales as
data were insufﬁcient to discriminate impacts of their respective
depredation. To include depredation, some data are added to
those traditionally used in ecosystem models, such as the quantity
of resource depredated or the depredation rate. In addition to
this, it is necessary to know in what proportion depredation
modiﬁes the depredating species’ diet.
In addition to analysing how to account for the greatest num-
ber of expected impacts associated with depredation, evaluating
alternative model structures helped delineate the limitations of
each model formulation. While all alternative models were
derived from the same baseline model, each of the three
depredation-explicit models posed different modelling choices in
terms of model group aggregation and feedback structure, which
can signiﬁcantly impact ecosystem model predictions ( Pinnegar
et al., 2005; Marzloff et al., 2011).
Note for instance, that we endeavoured to keep equilibrium
biomasses for all groups similar across all models by setting simi-
lar input parameters across all models. All equilibrium biomasses
were identical across models except for an unexpected /C24 1.8% in-
crease in the equilibrium biomass of killer whale in the food sub-
sidy model (which possibly explains the observed difference in
natural predation mortality due to depredating killer whales rela-
tive to other models). We suspect that this slight change in the
food subsidy model emerged from the Ecopath mass-balancing al-
gorithm, as this model does not include any feedback between
“depredated target species” and the commercial ﬁshery. In the in-
creased ﬁshing effort model, depredation was included into the
commercial ﬁshery but depredating species and ﬁshing gear were
aggregated into a single “caught toothﬁsh” functional group. This
aggregated representation is ecologically questionable given that
ecosystem models shall ideally discriminate between prey and
predator populations ( Fulton et al., 2003), while one could argue
that the amount of ﬁshing gear can be comparable to a predator
population abundance for the target species. Indeed, ﬁshers and
depredating species do not compete for hooked ﬁsh, since only
one model group removes the total ﬁsh caught. Moreover, the in-
creased ﬁshing effort model did not discriminate between the pre-
dation and depredation effects of depredating species on the
commercial ﬁshery. This distinction appears relevant in our case
study for killer whales, as natural predation on competitors of
toothﬁsh for food may be indirectly beneﬁcial for the ﬁshery
while depredation negatively affects that same ﬁshery. However,
disaggregating the ﬁshery into a “depredating species” ﬁshery and
a commercial ﬁshery, as done in the competing ﬁshery model,
does not seem completely realistic as separating out a single ﬁsh-
ery into two independent components in the Ecopath model.
Indeed, in the case of an increase in commercial ﬁshing effort, the
virtual depredation ﬁshery should be affected similarly, assuming
a direct relationship between ﬁshing effort and depredation rate.
However, this is not the case in this model as the two ﬁsheries re-
main fully separated.
Recommendations for depredation-resolving ecosystem
models
Due to structural constraints and lack of ﬂexibility of the Ecopath
framework to capture behaviour-mediated processes, this study
could not fully capture the complexity of interactions between
ﬁsheries and depredating species. For these reasons, we decided
not to pursue with dynamic simulations with Ecopath with
Ecosim. Depredation is the consequence of behavioural innova-
tions and adaptations of marine predator species to new feeding
opportunities offered by ﬁsheries, including actively searching
and/or following ﬁshing vessels or purposely using human equip-
ment to feed on aggregated, easy-to-catch resources despite the
associated risk ( Bearzi et al. , 2019 ). These adaptations are time
dependent, occurring at the inter-annual level when individuals
progressively learn depredation (e.g. Tixier et al., 2016) or extend
their spatial range of interaction with vessels (e.g. Schakner et al.,
2014), or at the intra-annual level when individuals only switch
to depredation when natural prey are scarce.
3164 L. Clavareau et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

Medium- and long-term consequences of depredation for dep-
redating populations not only result from positive provisioning
effects but also from injuries or lethal risks related to interactions
with ﬁsheries. If depredation supplies more energy than the natu-
ral diet, depredation may enhance ﬁtness and, therefore, the re-
productive performances of individuals. This was found for killer
whales depredating on toothﬁsh catches at Crozet and depredat-
ing on tuna catches in the Strait of Gibraltar ( Guinet et al., 2015;
Tixier et al. , 2015 ; Esteban et al., 2016 ). If the energy gain due to
depredation relative to natural feeding is large, depredating popu-
lations could expand (in particular if also beneﬁting from dedi-
cated conservation effort), which could further enhance the
magnitude of depredation long-term impacts on the ecosystem.
However, this scenario may be only realistic in a situation where
the risks of fatal interactions with ﬁshing gear and vessels are lim-
ited. Depredating species can be exposed to the accidental risk of
getting caught in ﬁshing gear and/or intentional shooting from
ﬁshers ( Dans et al ., 2003 ; Azevedo et al. , 2017 ). The bycatch of
depredating species such as marine mammals is often reported in
many static net and trawl ﬁsheries ( Read, 2008 ). Bycatches of
depredating species should be considered in future studies aiming
to address the full range of ecosystem effects resulting from
depredation.
While considering depredation-related processes in ecosystem
models is important, this study only partially addresses this chal-
lenge, which will require further development in future studies.
Future ecosystem modelling studies should consider temporal
variations in the size of depredating species populations and in
the composition of their diet associated with changes in prey
availability. However, to provide accurate input information, fur-
ther understanding of the socio-ecosystem interactions generated
locally by depredation is needed. First, and as raised by the ﬁnd-
ings of the present study, understanding the extent to which dep-
redated resources replace natural prey in depredating species’
diets appears as a critical element to investigate. Second, assessing
whether the balance between beneﬁts and costs is positive or neg-
ative for depredating species is pivotal to determining long-term
depredating species’ population growth rates. In summary, we
present a pilot study exploring, within the constrained Ecopath
framework, alternative ways of incorporating depredation on
ﬁsheries catches. By assessing how different model formulations
affected estimates of natural predation and ﬁshing mortality on
different model groups, the study provides a number of insights
on the ecosystem effects of a depredation-impacted subantarctic
ﬁshery. The results also highlight the limitations of Ecopath-
based modelling to address complex behaviour-mediated pro-
cesses. Thus, the development of dedicated models that can accu-
rately capture complex multi-faceted socio-economic and
ecological impacts inherent to depredation conﬂicts is essential to
identify the conditions needed for the long-term coexistence of
ﬁsheries and marine predators and to contribute to ecosystem-
based management of marine ecosystem.
Supplementary data
Supplementary material is available at the ICESJMS online ver-
sion of the manuscript.
Funding
This research was supported by the French National Research
Agency (ANR — program ORCADEPRED ANR-17-CE32-0007
— Principal Investigator: Dr Christophe Guinet — CEBC
CNRS). PT was supported by the Australian Research Council
(Linkage Project 160100329).
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to Elisabeth Fulton and Jessica Melbourne-
Thomas (CSIRO) as well as Christophe Barbraud, Yves Cherel,
Karine Delord, and Christophe Guinet (CEBC) for sharing their
expertise and helping in the development of the models. Special
thanks are due to Guy Duhamel, Charlotte Chazeau, and Fe ´lix
Massiot-Granier (Muse ´um National d’Histoire Naturelle de
Paris) for providing access to data and insightful comments.
Lastly, we would like to thank Ching Villanueva and all partici-
pants in the ORCADEPRED project.
Data availability statement
The data underlying this article cannot be shared publicly due to
conﬁdentiality agreements in place.
References
Azevedo, A. F., Carvalho, R. R., Kajin, M., Van Sluys, M., Bisi, T. L.,
Cunha, H. A., and Lailson-Brito, J. 2017. The ﬁrst conﬁrmed de-
cline of a delphinid population from Brazilian waters: 2000–2015
abundance of Sotalia guianensis in Guanabara Bay, South-eastern
Brazil. Ecological Indicators, 79: 1–10.
Bearzi, G., Piwetz, S., and Reeves, R. R. 2019. Odontocete adaptations
to human impact and vice versa. In Ethology and Behavioral
Ecology of Odontocetes, Ethology and Behavioral Ecology of
Marine Mammals, pp. 211–235. Ed. by B. Wu ¨rsig, Springer
International Publishing, Cham.
Blanchard, J. L., Andersen, K. H., Scott, F., Hintzen, N. T., Piet, G.,
and Jennings, S. 2014. Evaluating targets and trade-offs among
ﬁsheries and conservation objectives using a multispecies size
spectrum model. Journal of Applied Ecology, 51: 612–622.
CCAMLR. 2018a. Fishery report 2018: Dissostichus eleginoides
Kerguelen Islands French EEZ (division 58.5.1).https://www.
ccamlr.org/en/publications/ﬁshery-reports (last accessed 9 Nov
2020).
CCAMLR. 2018b. Fishery report 2018: Dissostichus eleginoides Crozet
Island French EEZ (Subarea 58.6). https://www.ccamlr.org/en/
publications/ﬁshery-reports. Accessed 9 Nov 2020
Cherel, Y., and Duhamel, G. 2004. Antarctic jaws: cephalopod prey of
sharks in Kerguelen waters. Deep Sea Research Part I:
Oceanographic Research Papers, 51: 17–31.
Cherel, Y., Duhamel, G., and Gasco, N. 2004. Cephalopod fauna of
subantarctic islands: new information from predators. Marine
Ecology Progress Series, 266: 143–156.
Christensen, V., and Walters, C. J. 2004. Ecopath with Ecosim: meth-
ods, capabilities and limitations. Ecological Modelling, 172:
109–139.
Christensen, V., Walters, C., Pauly, D., and Forrest, R. 2008. Ecopath
with Ecosim 6: A User’s Guide. Fisheries Centre, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, BC.
Clarke, M. R. 1980. Cephalopoda in the diet of sperm whales of the
Southern Hemisphere and their bearing on sperm whale biology.
Discovery Report, 37: 1–324.
Dans, S. L., Koen Alonso, M., Pedraza, S. N., and Crespo, E. A. 2003.
Incidental catch of dolphins in trawling ﬁsheries off Patagonia,
Argentina: can populations persist? Ecological Applications, 13:
754–762.
Duhamel, G., Gasco, N., and Davaine, P. 2005. Poissons des I ˆles
Kerguelen et Crozet. Guide re ´gional de l’oce´an Austral. Muse´um
National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris. 419 pp.
Duhamel, G., and Williams, R. 2011. History of whaling, sealing, ﬁsh-
ery and aquaculture trials in the area of the Kerguelen Plateau.
Cybium, 35: 15–28.
Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation into Ecopath 3165
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

Esteban, R., Verborgh, P., Gaufﬁer, P., Gime ´nez, J., Guinet, C., and
de Stephanis, R. 2016. Dynamics of killer whale, blueﬁn tuna and
human ﬁsheries in the Strait of Gibraltar. Biological
Conservation, 194: 31–38.
Fulton, E. A., Link, J. S., Kaplan, I. C., Savina-Rolland, M., Johnson,
P., Ainsworth, C., Horne, P., et al. 2011. Lessons in modelling and
management of marine ecosystems: the Atlantis experience: les-
sons learnt with Atlantis. Fish and Fisheries, 12: 171–188.
Fulton, E. A., Smith, A. D., and Johnson, C. R. 2003. Effect of com-
plexity on marine ecosystem models. Marine Ecology Progress
Series, 253: 1–16.
Gasco, N. 2011. Contributions to marine science by ﬁshery observers
in the French EEZ of Kerguelen. In Proceedings of the 1st
International Science Symposium on the Kerguelen Plateau
(Concarneau, 2010). The Kerguelen Plateau, Marine Ecosystem
and Fisheries, pp. 93–98.
Gasco, N., Tixier, P., Duhamel, G., and Guinet, C. 2015. Comparison
of two methods to assess ﬁsh losses due to depredation by killer
whales and sperm whales on demersal longlines. CCAMLR
Science, 22: 1–14.
Gilman, E., Brothers, N., Mcpherson, G., and Dalzell, P. 2007. A re-
view of cetacean interactions with longline gear. Journal of
Cetacean Research and Management, 8: 215–223.
Gilman, E., Suuronen, P., Hall, M., and Kennelly, S. 2013. Causes and
methods to estimate cryptic sources of ﬁshing mortality. Journal
of Fish Biology, 83: 766–803.
Guinet, C., Cherel, Y., Ridoux, V., and Jouventin, P. 1996.
Consumption of marine resources by seabirds and seals in Crozet
and Kerguelen waters: changes in relation to consumer biomass
1962–85. Antartic Science, 8: 23–30.
Guinet, C., Tixier, P., Gasco, N., and Duhamel, G. 2015. Long-term
studies of Crozet Island killer whales are fundamental to under-
standing the economic and demographic consequences of their
depredation behaviour on the Patagonian toothﬁsh ﬁshery. ICES
Journal of Marine Science, 72: 1587–1597.
Hall, S. J. 1999. The Effect of Fishing on Marine Ecosystems and
Communities. Fish Biology Aquatic Research Series. Blackwell,
Oxford.
Hollowed, A. 2000. Are multispecies models an improvement on
single-species models for measuring ﬁshing impacts on marine
ecosystems? ICES Journal of Marine Science, 57: 707–719.
Jacobsen, N. S., Burgess, M. G., and Andersen, K. H. 2017. Efﬁciency
of ﬁsheries is increasing at the ecosystem level. Fish and Fisheries,
18: 199–211.
Jacoby, M. E., Hilderbrand, G. V., Servheen, C., Schwartz, C. C.,
Arthur, S. M., Hanley, T. A., Robbins, C. T., et al. 1999. Trophic
relations of brown and black bears in several Western North
American ecosystems. The Journal of Wildlife Management, 63:
921–929.
Labadie, G., Tixier, P., Barbraud, C., Fay, R., Gasco, N., Duhamel, G.,
and Guinet, C. 2018. First demographic insights on historically
harvested and poorly known male sperm whale populations off
the Crozet and Kerguelen Islands (Southern Ocean). Marine
Mammal Science, 34: 595–615.
Lundstro¨m, K., Lunneryd, S.-G., Ko ¨nigson, S., and Hemmingsson,
M. 2010. Interactions between harbour seals ( Phoca vitulina ) and
coastal ﬁsheries along the Swedish west coast: an overview.
NAMMCOSP Scientiﬁc Publications, 8: 329–340.
Martin, A., and Pruvost, P. 2007. Pecheker, relational database for
analysis and management of ﬁsheries and related biological data
from the French southern ocean ﬁsheries monitoring scientiﬁc
programs, Muse´um National d’Histoire Naturelle.
Marzloff, M. P., Dambacher, J. M., Johnson, C. R., Little, L. R., and
Frusher, S. D. 2011. Exploring alternative states in ecological sys-
tems with a qualitative analysis of community feedback.
Ecological Modelling, 222: 2651–2662.
Massiot-Granier, F., Duhamel, G., and Pe´ron, C. 2019a. An integrated
stock assessment for the Kerguelen Island EEZ Patagonian tooth-
ﬁsh (Dissostichus eleginoides ) ﬁshery in Division 58.5.1. CCAMLR
Document WG-FSA2019/58.
Massiot-Granier, F., Duhamel, G., and Pe ´ron, C. 2019b. An inte-
grated stock assessment for the Crozet Islands Patagonian tooth-
ﬁsh ( Dissostichus eleginoides ) ﬁshery in Subarea 58.6. CCAMLR
Document WG-FSA2019/57 rev1.
Mitchell, J. D., McLean, D. L., Collin, S. P., and Langlois, T. J. 2018.
Shark depredation in commercial and recreational ﬁsheries.
Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 28: 715–748.
Newsome, T. M., Dellinger, J. A., Pavey, C. R., Ripple, W. J., Shores,
C. R., Wirsing, A. J., and Dickman, C. R. 2015. The ecological
effects of providing resource subsidies to predators: resource sub-
sidies and predators. Global Ecology and Biogeography, 24: 1–11.
Northridge, S. P. 1984.World review of interactions between marine
mammals and ﬁsheries. Report # 251, United Nations (UN) Food
and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome, Italy. 190 pp.
Northridge, S. P. 2018. Fisheries interactions. In B. Wu ¨rsig, J. G. M.
Thewissen, & K. M. Kovacs (Eds.), Encylopedia of Marine
Mammals (Third Edition) (pp. 375–383). Academic Press.
Oro, D., Genovart, M., Tavecchia, G., Fowler, M. S., and Martı ´nez-
Abraı´n, A. 2013. Ecological and evolutionary implications of food
subsidies from humans. Ecology Letters, 16: 1501–1514.
Peterson, M. J., and Hanselman, D. 2017. Sableﬁsh mortality associ-
ated with whale depredation in Alaska. ICES Journal of Marine
Science, 74: 1382–1394.
Peterson, M. J., Mueter, F., Hanselman, D., Lunsford, C., Matkin, C.,
and Fearnbach, H. 2013. Killer whale ( Orcinus orca ) depredation
effects on catch rates of six groundﬁsh species: implications for
commercial longline ﬁsheries in Alaska. ICES Journal of Marine
Science, 70: 1220–1232.
Pinnegar, J. K., Blanchard, J. L., Mackinson, S., Scott, R. D., and
Duplisea, D. E. 2005. Aggregation and removal of weak-links in
food-web models: system stability and recovery from disturbance.
Ecological Modelling, 184: 229–248.
Piroddi, C., Coll, M., Liquete, C., Macias, D., Greer, K., Buszowski, J.,
Steenbeek, J., et al. 2017. Historical changes of the Mediterranean
Sea ecosystem: modelling the role and impact of primary produc-
tivity and ﬁsheries changes over time. Scientiﬁc Reports, 7: 44491.
Piroddi, C., Coll, M., Steenbeek, J., Macias Moy, D., and Christensen,
V. 2015. Modelling the Mediterranean marine ecosystem as a
whole: addressing the challenge of complexity. Marine Ecology
Progress Series, 533: 47–65.
Plaga´nyi, E´ . E., and Butterworth, D. S. 2004. A critical look at the po-
tential of Ecopath with ecosim to assist in practical ﬁsheries man-
agement. African Journal of Marine Science, 26: 261–287.
Pruvost, P., Duhamel, G., and Palomares, M. L. D. 2005. An ecosys-
tem model of the Kerguelen Islands’ EEZ. In:Palomares M,
Pruvost P, Pitcher T, Pauly D (eds) Modeling Antarctic marine
ecosystems. Fisheries Centre Research Reports 13(7). Fisheries
Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, p 40–64.
Pruvost, P., Martin, A., Denys, G., and Causse, R. 2011.
SIMPA-PECHEKER. A tool for ﬁsheries management and ecosys-
tem modelling. In The Kerguelen Plateau Marine Ecosystem and
Fisheries, Proceedings of the 1st International Science Symposium
on the Kerguelen Plateau, 2010, pp. 263–270. Ed. by G. Duhamel
and D. Welsford. Socie´te´ Franc¸aise d’Ichtyologie, Paris, France.
Rabearisoa, N., Sabarros, P. S., Romanov, E. V., Lucas, V., and Bach,
P. 2018. Toothed whale and shark depredation indicators: a case
study from the Reunion Island and Seychelles pelagic longline
ﬁsheries. PLoS One, 13: e0202037.
Read, A. J. 2008. The looming crisis: interactions between marine
mammals and ﬁsheries. Journal of Mammalogy, 89: 541–548.
Roche, C., Guinet, C., Gasco, N., and Duhamel, G. 2007. Marine
mammals and demersal longline ﬁshery interactions in Crozet
3166 L. Clavareau et al.
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021

and Kerguelen Exclusive Economic Zones: an assessment of dep-
redation levels. CCAMLR Science, 14: 67–82.
Schakner, Z. A., Lunsford, C., Straley, J., Eguchi, T., and Mesnick, S.
L. 2014. Using models of social transmission to examine the
spread of longline depredation behavior among sperm whales in
the Gulf of Alaska. PLoS One, 9: e109079.
Thode, A., Wild, L., Straley, J., Barnes, D., Bayless, A., O’Connell, V.,
Oleson, E., et al. 2016. Using line acceleration to measure false
killer whale ( Pseudorca crassidens ) click and whistle source levels
during pelagic longline depredation. The Journal of the
Acoustical Society of America, 140: 3941–3951.
Tixier, P., Authier, M., Gasco, N., and Guinet, C. 2015. Inﬂuence of
artiﬁcial food provisioning from ﬁsheries on killer whale repro-
ductive output: artiﬁcial food provisioning and killer whale repro-
duction. Animal Conservation, 18: 207–218.
Tixier, P., Barbraud, C., Pardo, D., Gasco, N., Duhamel, G., and
Guinet, C. 2017. Demographic consequences of ﬁsheries interac-
tion within a killer whale ( Orcinus orca ) population. Marine
Biology, 164: 170–186.
Tixier, P., Burch, P., Massiot-Granier, F., Ziegler, P., Welsford, D.,
Lea, M.-A., Hindell, M. A., et al. 2020. Assessing the impact of
toothed whale depredation on socio-ecosystems and ﬁshery man-
agement in wide-ranging subantarctic ﬁsheries. Reviews in Fish
Biology and Fisheries, 30: 203–217.
Tixier, P., Gasco, N., Duhamel, G., and Guinet, C. 2016. Depredation
of Patagonian toothﬁsh ( Dissostichus eleginoides) by two sympatri-
cally occurring killer whale ( Orcinus orca ) ecotypes: insights on
the behavior of the rarely observed type D killer whales. Marine
Mammal Science, 32: 983–1003.
Tixier, P., Gime´nez, J., Reisinger, R., Me´ndez-Fernandez, P., Arnould,
J., Cherel, Y., and Guinet, C. 2019b. Importance of toothﬁsh in
the diet of generalist subantarctic killer whales: implications for
ﬁsheries interactions. Marine Ecology Progress Series, 613:
197–210.
Towers, J. R., Tixier, P., Ross, K. A., Bennett, J., Arnould, J. P. Y.,
Pitman, R. L., and Durban, J. W. 2019. Movements and dive be-
haviour of a toothﬁsh-depredating killer and sperm whale. ICES
Journal of Marine Science, 76: 298–311.
Trenkel, V. M. 2018. How to provide scientiﬁc advice for
ecosystem-based management now. Fish and Fisheries, 19:
390–398.
Ulanowicz, R. E., and Puccia, C. J. 1990. Mixed trophic impacts in
ecosystems. Coenoses, 7–16.
Votier, S. C., Bearhop, S., Witt, M. J., Inger, R., Thompson, D., and
Newton, J. 2010. Individual responses of seabirds to commercial
ﬁsheries revealed using GPS tracking, stable isotopes and vessel
monitoring systems. Journal of Applied Ecology, 47: 487–497.
Werner, T. B., Northridge, S., Press, K. M., and Young, N. 2015.
Mitigating bycatch and depredation of marine mammals in long-
line ﬁsheries. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 72: 1576–1586.
Yukhov, V. L. 1972. The range of ﬁsh of the genus Dissostichus (Fam.
Nototheniidae) in Antarctic waters of the Indian Ocean. Journal
of Ichthyology [Vosprosy ikhtiologii], 12: 346–347.
Handling editor: Simon Northridge
Comparison of approaches for incorporating depredation into Ecopath 3167
Downloaded from https://academic.oup.com/icesjms/article/77/7-8/3153/6000671 by Ifremer, Bibliothèque La Pérouse user on 13 January 2021
