Fisheries Centre 
Research Reports 
 
2002   Volume 10   Number 2 
 
 
 
 
 
The Use of Ecosystem Models to 
Investigate Multispecies 
Management Strategies for 
Capture Fisheries 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, Canada 
ISSN 1198-6727 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                                               ISSN 1198-6727 
 
The Use of Ecosystem Models to Investigate  
Multispecies Management Strategies  
for Capture Fisheries 
 
Fisheries  Centre  Research  Reports 
2002   Volume  10   Number 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
edited by 
 
Tony Pitcher and Kevern Cochrane  
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 pages © published by  
 
The Fisheries Centre, University of British 
Columbia 
 
2204 Main Mall 
Vancouver, B.C., Canada 
2002 
 
 
ISSN 1198-6727 
 
THE USE OF ECOSYSTEM MODELS TO INVESTIGATE MULTISPECIES 
MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES FOR CAPTURE FISHERIES  
 
Edited by 
 
Tony Pitcher and Kevern Cochrane  
2002  
 Fisheries Centre Research Reports 10(2),156pp 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Page 
Directors Foreword  Ecosim and the Land of Cockayne ....................................................... 3 
 
Executive Summary .................................................................................................................. 4 
 
Introduction  
 
The Use of Ecosystem Models to Investigate Ecosystem-Based  
 Management Strategies for Capture Fisheries: Introduction   
 Kevern Cochrane ................................................................................................................. 5 
Searching for Optimum Fishing Strategies for Fishery Development,  
 Recovery and Sustainability  
 Carl J. Walters, V. Christensen and Daniel Pauly  ........................................................... 11 
 
Contributed Papers 
 
Simulating Fisheries Management Strategies in the Strait of Georgia  
 Ecosystem using Ecopath and Ecosim 
 Steven J. D. Martell, Alasdair I. Beattie, Carl J. Walters, 
 Tarun Nayar and Robyn Briese ......................................................................................... 16 
The Use of Ecosystem-based Modelling to Investigate  Multi-species Management  
 Strategies for Capture Fisheries in the Bali Strait, Indonesia 
 Eny Anggraini Buchary, Jackie Alder, Subhat Nurhakim  and Tonny Wagey.............. 24 
The Eastern Bering Sea 
 Kerim Aydin ................................................................................................................ 33 
A Preliminary North-East Atlantic Marine Ecosystem Model:  
 the Faroe Islands and ICES Area Vb 
 Dirk Zeller and Katia Freire
..................................................................................... 39 
Policy Simulation of Fisheries in the Hong Kong Marine Ecosystem 
 Wai-Lung Cheung, Reg Watson
 and Tony Pitcher...........................................................46 
Exploration of Management and Conservation Strategies for the  
 Multispecies Fisheries of Lake Malawi  using an Ecosystem Modelling Approach
  
 Edward Nsiku ................................................................................................................ 54 
The Use of Ecosim to Investigate Multispecies Harvesting Strategies for  
 Capture Fisheries of the Newfoundland-Labrador Shelf 
 Marcelo Vasconcellos, Johanna  Heymans and Alida Bundy ..........................................68 
Simulating Management Options for the North Sea in the 1880s 
 Steven Ma ckinson............................................................................................................... 73 
Ecosim Case Study: Port Phillip Bay, Australia 
 Beth Fulton an d Tony Smith ..............................................................................................83 
 
 
Page 2, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Simulating Extreme Fishing Polices in Prince William Sound, Alaska:  
 a preliminary evaluation of an ecosystem-based policy analysis tool   
 Thomas A. Okey ........................................................................................................................... 94 
Exploring Alternative Management Policies: A Preliminary  
 Ecological Approach for the San Matias Gulf Fishery, Argentina 
 Villarino María Fernanda, Mario L. Lasta and Marcelo Pájaro...................................... 109 
Exploring Multispecies Harvesting Strategies on the Eastern  
 Scotian Shelf with Ecosim 
 Alida Bundy and Sylvie Guénette ............................................................................................ 112 
The Use of Ecosystem Models to Investigate Multispecies Management Strategies  
 for Capture Fisheries: Report on  Southern Benguela Simulations 
 Lynne Shannon ............................................................................................................... 118 
Impact of Harvesting Strategies on Fisheries and Community Structure on  
 the Continental Shelf of the Campeche Sound, Southern Gulf of Mexico 
 Francisco Arre guin-Sanchez ............................................................................................127 
Evaluating Harvesting Strategies for Fisheries of the Ecosystem of 
 the Central Gulf of California 
 Francisco Arreguín-Sánchez an d Luis E. Calderón-Aguilera ........................................ 135 
Testing Responses of a Tropical Shelf Ecosystem to Fisheries Management 
 Strategies: a Small-scale Fishery from the Colombian Caribbean Sea
 
 Luis Orlando Duarte and Camilo B. García ....................................................................142 
Exploratory analysis of possible management strategies in Lake Victoria fisheries (Kenyan sec-
tor) using the recent Ecosim  software 
 Jacques Moreau and Maria Concepcion Villanueva  ....................................................150 
 
Participants in the Workshop............................................................................................. 155 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This report is co-published as an FAO Fisheries Report  
 
A  Research Report from   
The UBC Fisheries Centre and the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations  
 
 
 
156  pages © Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, 2002 
 
 
 FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 3  
  
Director’s Foreword 
 
Ecosim in the  
Land of Cockayne 
 
There is a famous Breughal engraving, 
‘Big Fish Eat Little Fish’, that illus-
trates a marine food web by showing 
how the stomach of each size of fish 
contains fish of the smaller size class 
below. I use it to dramatise trophic re-
lationships and, many years ago, it 
made a neat cover for my textbook 
(Pitcher and Hart 1982). One student 
later said that the book cover taught 
him all he knew. Another Breughal 
painting is reproduced opposite in 
hopes it will be equally instructive.   
 
Like the Breughal engraving, Ecopath 
models take all trophic relationships 
within an aquatic ecosystem into ac-
count, and the approach will be famil-
iar to many readers of Fisheries Cen-
tre Research Reports, being the sub-
j e c t  o f  5  p r e v i o u s  i s s u e s   f r o m  1 9 9 6  
(see below).  Ecosim, the dynamic version of Eco-
path (Walters et al. 1997, 2000) has recently been 
endowed with routines that not only simulate the 
consequences of changes in fisheries for all ele-
ments in the ecosystem, but can also search for 
fishing rates that will maximize ecological, social 
or economic goals. The first report of this impor-
tant advance made by Carl Walters is presented 
here.  
 
This new facility has interested FAO because it 
could lead to a way of managing multispecies 
fisheries that takes into consideration all ele-
ments of the ecosystem, not just those that are 
subjected to fishing. Hence, the Fisheries Centre 
and FAO decided to hold a workshop to explore 
the potential of the new software, and the papers 
in this report are the result.   
 
Back to that Breughal. The ‘Land of Cockayne’ is a 
derisive medieval comment on those who imagine 
themselves in a paradise where food and luxuries 
are so easily obtainable that life is comprised of 
little more than a happy indolence. Or boast that 
they are in such a place. As Breugal’s painting 
shows (above), Cockayne is evidently such a fool’s 
paradise. The term ‘Cockayne’  probably derives 
from ‘cake’ (OED), and there are similar terms in 
medieval French. It gave rise to ‘Cockneys’, in-
habitants of London noted for boasting of the mi-
raculous nature of their city, and a similar idea 
also became the ‘Big Rock Candy Mountain’ of US 
hobo lore.  
 
What’s the moral here? Well - it is all too easy to 
be seduced by these elegant simulations. The 
‘Land of Cockayne’ is intended to provide a plan-
gent warning that we should continually check 
simulation results with the real world. And not be 
tempted to boast that Ecosim optima place us in a 
far better world. It is a reality check.
 
 
The Fisheries Centre Research Reports series 
publishes results of resear ch work carried out, or 
workshops held, at the UBC Fisheries Centre. The 
series focusses on multidisciplinary problems in 
fisheries management, and aims to provide a syn-
optic overview of the foundations, themes and 
prospects of current research.  
 
Fisheries Centre Research Reports are distributed 
to appropriate workshop participants or project 
partners, and are record ed in the Aquatic Sci-
ences and Fisheries Abstracts. A full list appears 
on the Fisheries Centre's Web site, 
www.fisheries.ubc.ca. Copies are available on re-
quest for a modest cost-recovery charge.  
 
Tony J. Pitcher 
Professor of Fisheries 
Director, UBC Fisheries Centre 
 
The Land of Cockayne, by Pieter Breughal the Elder, 1567.  As well as 
illustrating a Fool’s Paradise (not e the egg on legs and the walking 
roast pig), the painting also shows how some of the workshop  par-
ticipants felt after a week of simulations.   
Oil on panel, 52 x 78 cm,  Alte Pinakothek, Munich. 
Page 4, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
 
Literature cited 
 
Pitcher, T.J. and P.J.B. Hart  (1982) Fisheries Ecology. 
Chapman and Hall, London. 414 pp 
Walters, C., Christensen, V., and Pauly, D. (1997) Struc-
turing dynamic models of exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balanc e assessments. Reviews 
in Fish Biology and Fisheries 7(2): 139-172.  
Walters, C., Pauly, D., Christensen, V., and Kitchell, J. 
F. (2000) Representing density dependent conse-
quences of life history strategies in aquatic ecosys-
tems: EcoSim II. Ecosystems 3(1): 70-83. 
Mass-Balance Models of North-eastern Pacific Ecosys-
tems. Fisheries Centre Research Reports  1996, 
Vol.4 (1), 131 pp. 
Use of Ecopath with Ecosim to Evaluate Strategies for 
Sustainable Exploitation of Multi-Species Re-
sources. Fisheries Centre Research Reports  1998, 
Vol.6 (2), 49 pp 
A Trophic Mass-Balance Model of Alaska's Prince Wil-
liam Sound Ecosystem for the Post-Spill Period 
1994-1996. Fisheries Centre Research Reports  
1999, Vol.6 (4), 143 pp 
Ecosystem Change and the Decline of Marine Mam-
mals in the Eastern Bering Sea. Fisheries Centre 
Research Reports  1999, Vol.7 (1), 106 pp. 
A Trophic Mass-Balance Model of Alaska's Prince Wil-
liam Sound Ecosystem for the Post-Spill Period 
1994-1996, 2nd Edition. Fisheries Centre Research 
Reports  1999, Vol.7 (4), 137 pp. 
 
 
Executive Summary  
 
This report comprises th e edited proceedings of 
workshop held at the Fisheries Centre, University 
of British Columbia in July 2000, jointly spon-
s o r e d  b y  F A O ,  R o m e  a n d  thr government of Ja-
pan. 
 
This is the first published account of new Ecosim 
p o l i c y  s e a r c h  s o f t w a r e  t h a t  a i m s  t o  f i n d  f i s h i n g  
rates that maximize objective functions for eco-
nomic, ecological, employment or mixed goals. 
Two papers set out the numerical basis for the 
software and the procedure that was adopted for 
the workshop case studies.  
 
The report contains 18 ca se study papers explor-
ing the use of the ecosim policy software. 
Papers examine fisheries and their ecosystems in 
the Strait of Georgia (BC), the Bali Strait (Indone-
sia), the North Sea, The Faroe Islands, Hong 
Kong, Lake Malawi, Newfoundland, Port Philip 
Bay (Tasmania), Prince William Sound (Alaska), 
the San Matias Gulf (Argentina), the Scotian Shelf 
(Canada), Southern Benguela (South Africa), 
Campeche Sound (Mexico), Gulf of California 
(Mexico), the Caribbean (Columbia).
 
 
 
 
 FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 5  
  
The Use of Ecosystem Models to  
Investigate Ecosystem-based  
Management Strategies for  
Capture Fisheries:  
Introduction 
 
 
Kevern L. Cochrane 
FAO, Rome 
 
 
The Rationale: Providing Scientific  
Information for  Management 
 
In recent years those involved in the utilisation 
and management of aquatic resources have come 
to realise that the single-species or -resource ap-
proach still prevailing in the vast majority of fish-
eries in the world is incomplete and inadequate. 
Faced with mounting evidence of failures in our 
on-going attempts to use living aquatic resources 
in a sustainable and responsible way, we have 
been forced to re-examine the science, the man-
agement and the operations applied in fisheries, 
and all three have been found to be lacking.  
 
One of the most fundamental deficiencies is now 
widely considered to be the tendency to focus on 
fishery resources as essentially independent 
stocks, driven entirely by their inherent popula-
tion dynamics, as has been the practice during the 
dramatic expansion in fishing power and catches 
that characterised fisheries in the 20
th Century. In 
response to this realisation, global attention 
within fisheries is turning towards recognising 
that biological populations and communities 
function within and are ultimately regulated by 
the ecosystems in which they occur. The challenge 
now is to translate this intellectual acceptance of 
the need to manage fisheries as integral parts of 
the ecosystem, into an effective methodology that 
allows us to make optimal use of our diverse 
aquatic ecosystems in a responsible and sustain-
able way. 
 
The principles of ecosystem-based management 
of fisheries incorporate and extend the conven-
tional principles for sustainable fisheries devel-
opment. Instead of focusing on a single-species, 
ecosystem-based fisheries management strives to 
consider the capacity of the ecosystem as  a whole 
to produce food, revenues, employment and other 
essential and desirable services for humankind. 
From that starting point, it is necessary to devise 
utilisation and management strategies that enable 
us to optimise that capacity, taking into account 
variability in the system  and uncertainty in our 
knowledge. Instead of setting only relatively sim-
ple reference points relate d to single populations, 
these strategies will also need to refer to limits 
and targets related to conservation of ecosystem 
components, structures, processes and interac-
tions. An immediate implication of this is that the 
complexity of the system we are considering in-
creases and the number of objectives and the con-
flicts between those obje ctives increases substan-
tially.  This expansion in uncertainty and com-
plexity is not, however, a consequence of adopting 
ecosystem-based management, it is the result of 
recognising and attempting to consider the full 
complexity and uncertainty that have always been 
there, but that we have previously ignored.  
 
Fishery scientists, managers and interest groups 
are generally aware of the need to consider this 
full range of complexity, but there is still preva-
lent ignorance as to how to implement an effec-
tive ecosystem-based management system in 
practice, and the practical problems raised by this 
recognition are considerable.  Uncertainties and 
conflicting objectives have severely hindered suc-
cessful application of efforts to implement single-
species management and will be even harder to 
deal with as ecosystem interactions are recog-
nised and incorporated.   
 
Both the need for and difficulty of ecosystem-
based fisheries management were recognised by 
the 95 States which met in Kyoto, Japan, from 4 
to 9 December 1995 on the occasion of the Inter-
national Conference on the Sustainable Contribu-
tion of Fisheries to Food Security. They formu-
lated the Kyoto Declaration which proposed, 
amongst other important principles, that States 
should base their fisheries ‘policies, strategies and 
resource management and utilization for sustain-
able development of the fisheries sector on the 
following: (i) maintenance of ecological systems; 
(ii) use of the best scientific evidence available; 
(iii) improvement in economic and social well-
being; and (iv) inter- and intra-generational eq-
uity’.   
 
Subsequent to the Kyoto Conference, the Gov-
ernment of Japan provided financial support to 
FAO for a programme to assist countries in im-
plementing the Kyoto Declaration. One of the 
projects undertaken un der this programme was 
entitled “Multispecies Fisheries Management” 
and aimed to investigate methods of providing 
scientific advice for improved multispecies and 
ecosystem-based fisheries management. Under 
this project, a workshop was held at the Fisheries 
Centre, UBC, in March 1998  to consider the “Use 
of Ecopath with Ecosim to Evaluate Strategies for 
Sustainable Exploitation of Multispecies Re-
Page 6, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
sources”1. The workshop did not come up with 
formal conclusions and recommendations, but 
there was widespread agreement that Ecopath 
with Ecosim (EwE), as a well-developed and ge-
neric ecosystem-modelling tool, could play a use-
ful role in providing important information to de-
cision-makers on fisheries policy and strategies 
from an ecosystem perspective, complementary 
to that available from conventional single-species 
assessments. 
 
This second workshop, also supported by the 
Government of Japan,  was designed to follow-on 
from that preliminary meeting and to look in 
more detail, using specific case studies, at the 
type of information, including its limitations, 
which can be expected from our existing ability to 
assess and forecast at the scale of ecosystems. 
 
The Objective of the Workshop 
 
A key requirement for effective management is 
good information upon which good decisions can 
be based, and it is a key role for science and scien-
tists to provide the best available information on 
the state of the resources and their likely re-
sponse, or responses, to any planned fisheries or 
management action.  The workshop was intended 
primarily to address this task and, particularly, to 
examine the nature of the information at the scale 
of the ecosystem which scientists can provide for 
ecosystem-based fisheries management. 
 
The objective of the workshop was therefore to 
use quantitative ecosystem models to investigate 
the impact of different multispecies harvesting 
strategies on the community structure and fishery 
yields of different ecosystem types with a view to 
identifying preferred harvesting strategies. 
 
The starting point of the workshop was the mod-
els we have available. The workshop was open to 
any interested scientist who had been working on 
ecosystem modelling, and each participant was 
asked to bring a working ecosystem model of an 
exploited aquatic ecosystem, including the impact 
of the fishery or fisheries on exploited stocks.  In 
practice, all the models brought to the workshop 
were EwE models.  The pa rticipants were also 
asked to bring, as far as possible, supplementary 
information which could be used to assist in 
evaluating and developing realistic management 
objectives and strategies for their particular eco-
system. This supplementary information in-
cluded, for example, estimates of pristine biomass 
                                                        
1 U s e  o f  E c o p a t h  w i t h  E c o s i m  t o  E v a l u a t e  S t r a t e g i e s  f o r  S u s -
tainable Exploitation of Multispecies Resources. Fisheries 
Centre Research Reports 6 (2). Fisheries Centre, University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver. 49pp. 
of the different stocks or a suitable surrogate of 
such estimates, background information on the 
social and economic importance of the fishery, 
and estimates of bycatch, discards and unre-
ported catch. 
 
These models and information were to be used by 
each participant: 
 
to consider different sets of objectives for their 
ecosystem;  
to use the models to identify the management 
strategies which would come closest to achiev-
ing those objectives; and 
to estimate the ecosystem consequences of 
each management strategy.  
 
In doing so, the participants were also asked to 
consider the key sources of uncertainty in their 
models and the possible implications of these for 
their results and conclusions. 
 
This approach effectively uses the ecosystem 
models as operating models (e.g. Hilborn and 
Walters, 1992; Cochrane et al., 1998).  Such an 
application was one of the primary goals of the 
developers of Ecosim, who suggested it could be 
used to “conduct fisheries policy analyses that ex-
plicitly account for ecosystem trophic interac-
tions” (Walters et al.  1997) and routines have 
been provided in Ecosim to assist the user in such 
exploration of fisheries strategies or policies. A 
full description of these routines can be found in 
the Help System of EwE. 
 
The first of the routines is the ‘open loop’ policy 
search which estimates the time-series of relative 
fleet sizes that would maximize a multi-criterion 
objective function that includes net economic 
value, social employment value, and ecological 
stability criteria.  The relative fleet sizes are used 
to calculate the relative fishing mortality rates by 
each fleet type on the affected stocks. The user, in 
this case the participant at the workshop, could 
therefore specify the relative priority of economic 
value, social employment value and ecosystem 
stability, where ecosystem stability can be defined 
in terms of relative abundance of the different 
biological groups included in the model. These 
relative priorities re present the management 
goals. The open loop search then identifies the 
strategy, in terms of relative fleet sizes, that 
comes closest to meeting those goals.  
 
Ecosim also includes ‘closed loop’ policy simula-
tions that allow the user to examine the conse-
quences of a given management strategy, taking 
into account the dynamics and uncertainties of 
the stock assessment and regulatory processes.  
 FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 7  
  
I n  o r d e r  t o  d o  t h i s ,  i t  i n c l u d e s  r o u t i n e s  t o  s i m u -
late the dynamics of the assessment process, i.e. 
collection of data including errors in the estimates 
of biomass or fishing rate, and for the implemen-
tation of the assessment results through limita-
tion of the annual fishing efforts. 
 
Developing the Strategies at  
the Workshop 
 
Determining Strategies for Base Case  
Management Objectives 
 
It is possible to use EwE to explore policy options 
in a variety of ways but it was decided that the 
routines included in EwE for this purpose, the 
‘open loop’ search and the ‘closed loop’ simula-
tions, would be the primary tools used at this 
workshop.  
 
The open loop routine uses a non-linear search 
procedure to determine the optimum fishing rates 
over time across the fleet, according to the objec-
tive function specified by the user in the open 
loop input screen (Table 1). 
 
The closed loop routine uses 
the fishing pattern identified 
as optimum for a specified 
management goal using the 
open loop, and then runs a se-
ries of forward projections us-
ing that fishing pattern but 
maintaining the target fishing 
rates of the different fleets in 
accordance with the annual 
observations, with specified 
errors, on the status of the 
stock.   
 
This routine enables the user 
to estimate the actual per-
formance of the selected man-
agement strategy (i.e. the op-
timum fishing pattern over 
time estimated by the open 
loop routine) given the obser-
vation error inevitably en-
countered by the fisheries 
manager striving to maintain 
the fishing rates specified by 
the policy in a real fishery.  
 
The information generated by 
these routines could be used, 
in combination with other 
sources of information includ-
ing the results of single-
species assessments and fore-
casts, to inform the manager on the strategy or 
strategies that would best achieve the agreed ob-
jectives. 
 
Strategies Considered 
 
As a common starting point, participants were 
asked to investigate strategies that would achieve 
five “base case” management objectives, of which 
three (b – d below) were derived directly from the 
options available in the open loop routine.  The 
base case strategies were: 
 
a) current fishing strategy; 
b) maximum economic value; 
c) maximum employment; 
d) maintaining ecosystem structure; and 
e) the “big compromise”: giving equal priority to 
achieving economic; employment and ecosystem 
structure performance. 
 
The strategies b), c) and d) were considered to be 
extremes and unlikely to be seriously considered 
as realistic options in the ecosystems being stud-
  
 
Value Component Value Weight 
Net economic value 0.01 
Net social (employment) 
value 
0.01 
Ecosystem stability 1 
 
a) Determining broad policy priorities 
 
 
Gear Type Jobs/Catch 
Purse seine 0.02 
Bottom trawl 0.03 
Long line 0.1 
 
b) Specifying the relative employment value of the different fisheries indicating 
which fisheries will be favoured under Net social value  
 
 
Biomass group B ideal / B base Importance 
Phytoplankton 1 0.01 
Sardine 1.5 1 
Hake 2 1 
 
c)  The target biomass (B ideal / B base) and relative Importance of the different 
biomass groups to specify what ecosystem structure is preferred under 
Ecosystem Stability 
Table 1.  The inputs required to specify a management goal under the open 
loop routine.  The entries shown are hypothetical and given as examples only.  
With those given under Table 1a), the objective non-linear search procedure 
would attempt to determine the fishing rate pattern which maintained ecosys-
tem stability in accordance with the targets and Importance scorings given in 
Table 1c.
 
Page 8, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
ied.  However, examining the implications of each 
was considered to be informative and the extreme 
boundaries they represented could provide useful 
starting points from which to consider multi-
objective strategies, such as the ‘big compromise’. 
When considering objectives and strategies for in-
forming managers, as opposed to the exploratory 
trials undertaken at the workshop, the open loop 
routine of EwE could be used to explore a wide 
range of more subtle compromises between the 
basic Value Components of economic value, social 
value and ecological stability (Table 1a).  
 
Procedure for Identifying Strategies 
 
The following specifications and procedures were 
agreed upon to ensure reliability and comparabil-
ity in results of this investigation. 
 
• All strategies would be tested over a 20 year 
simulation unless the results indicated that 
the ecosystem had not stabilised over that pe-
riod, in which case the simulation period 
would be extended until stability was 
achieved. 
 
• With any non-linear search procedure, there 
is a danger that the procedure will converge 
on a local minimum, not on the global mini-
mum for the given objective function.  Par-
ticipants were therefore advised to undertake 
at least 5-6 separate estimations using the 
“start at random F’s” option in the routine 
and to check the value of the objective func-
tion after each to ensure that the procedure 
has reached a global minimum. 
 
• Sensitivity analyses were undertaken to in-
vestigate the effect of the vulnerability set-
tings used in the simulations as output from 
Ecosim is particularly sensitive to these val-
ues.  These were to include options with vul-
nerability set at 0.4 and 0.7 throughout, as 
well as any matrix of settings assumed or es-
timated for that specific ecosystem. 
 
• A discount rate of 0.04 would be used as the 
default value in the open loop searches.  
 
The fishing rates per fleet, catches obtained, eco-
nomic values obtained, biomass of the key bio-
mass groups and value of the objective function, 
including for each Value Component (i.e. eco-
nomic value, social value and ecosystem stability), 
were noted for each open loop estimation. 
 
Testing the performance of the current fishing 
strategy in each ecosystem (option a) required 
running the model over the 20 year simulation 
with the fishing rates of each fleet maintained at 
the rates used in the underlying Ecopath model. 
Maximising the economic value, employment or 
maintaining ecosystem structure required speci-
fying a weight of 1 for the appropriate Value Com-
ponent shown in Table 1 a), and low, non-zero 
values (e.g. 0.01) for the other two.  Under the 
“big compromise” it was found that the objective 
function used in the search procedure generated a 
negatively biased weight for ecosystem stability 
and therefore, instead of using equal weights for 
each of the three Value Components under this 
scenario, it was found necessary to give weights 
of, for example, 1 to each of Economic value and 
Social value but a higher weight (typically 
between 5 and 25) to ecosystem stability in order 
t o  a c h i e v e  a n  o b j e c t i v e  f u n c t i o n  t h a t  g e n e r a t e d  
the desired compromise. 
 
The problem is well illustrated in, for example, 
the chapters by Vasconcellos et al. (see Figure 3) 
and Bundy (see Figures 2 and 3). In both cases 
the authors demonstrate the affects of changing 
the weighting given to the ecosystem value com-
ponent relative to the other value components 
and discuss the difficulties associated with identi-
fying an appropriate ecosystem weighting. In 
other cases authors select ed a single weighting 
which generated a solution in which an accept-
able level of ecosystem stability was  achieved, 
while in other cases authors simply used a 
weighting of one. In these last cases, there is a 
high probability that the ecosystem stability crite-
rion was dominated by the economic and social 
value components and that the estimated strategy 
would not, in fact, achieve the desired result. 
 
This workshop helped to demonstrate the prob-
lems in the optimisation routine and to point to 
ways of addressing it. At the time of the finalisa-
tion of this report, suitable mathematical solu-
tions are being considered and may be included 
in the EwE software in due course. 
 
Defining ‘Ecosystem Stability’ 
 
In addition to the mathematical problem just de-
scribed, a fundamental philosophical issue also 
arose at the workshop. In discussions on appro-
priate values to use for the input screen reflected 
in Table 1 c), it became apparent that the term 
“Ecosystem Stability” did not mean the same to 
all participants and that what was considered to 
be the desired state for an ecosystem was highly 
subjective.  In a policy that excluded fishing, it 
may be reasonable to specify the desired state by 
giving all biomass groups equal weight, and indi-
cating the desired B(ideal) for each group as be-
ing the estimated pristine biomass (i.e. prior to 
 FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 9  
  
fishing).  However, shutting down all the fisheries 
is only rarely a preferred management option and 
fishing is an integral part of most ecosystems.  
Fishing must inevitably result in a reduction in 
biomass of the groups caught by the fishing gear 
and is also likely to lead to perturbations in other 
groups.  The pristine option is therefore excluded 
as a feasible goal and the user (or manager in a 
real fishery) has to identify a generally-acceptable 
desired state for the ecosystem and its component 
parts in the presence of fishing. 
 
Just what that desired state will be will frequently 
p r o v e  t o  b e  c o n t r o v e r s i a l ,  a s  w a s  f o u n d  a t  t h e  
workshop. Here, opinions ranged from: uniform 
reduction to the same (as a proportion of pristine) 
precautionary sustainable level in all biomass 
groups (the ‘ecosystem as the sum of its parts’ 
view); maintaining the key exploited groups at 
their most productive levels (the sustainable utili-
zation view); to striving to maintain species of 
particular conservation interest, such as cetace-
ans and turtles, at the highest levels relative to 
their pristine biomass (the conservationist view).  
This matter was not finally resolved at the work-
shop and reflects an important source of potential 
conflict as fisheries move towards ecosystem-
based management.  At the workshop, partici-
pants therefore tended to explore their own pre-
ferred options when considering ecosystem sta-
bility. This freedom of choice will not be a possi-
ble option, however, when different user groups 
are competing for the same resources in an eco-
system! 
 
Testing the Strategy with Observation 
Error: the closed loop 
 
Once the optimum management strategy had 
been identified for a given set of objectives, it was 
then tested for performance in simulations of 20 
years in the presence of observation error using 
the closed loop routine.  Under this, the strategy 
was run 100 times with randomly generated ob-
servation error in the inde x of abundance of each 
biomass group used each year by the ‘manager’ in 
order to maintain the fishing rates at those speci-
fied in the strategy.  These indices could be speci-
fied as either estimated catch or biomass, or the 
directly estimated exploitation rate of the previ-
ous year arising from, for example, a tagging pro-
gramme.  The closed loop routine therefore al-
lows the user to estimate the affects of observa-
tion and implementation error on the perform-
ance of the strategy identified by the open loop 
search.  
 
At the end of each set of Monte Carlo runs, par-
ticipants were requested to record the value of the 
objective function for each of the three Value 
Components for comparison with the results ob-
t a i n e d  i n  t h e  o p e n  l o o p  r o u t i n e ,  a n d  a l s o  t o  d e -
termine the spread of the biomass trajectories for 
each biomass group. 
 
The Wise Usxe of Policy Search Routines  
 
The results of the workshops clearly illustrated 
the valuable role of the open and closed loop pol-
icy search routines in exploring ecosystem-based 
management strategies. These routines provide 
efficient and objective means of identifying 
strategies that will best achieve clearly specified 
and precise objectives. However, many of the pa-
pers also illustrate the ab solute need to interpret 
the results cautiously, taking full account of the 
uncertainties in both the underlying model and in 
the optimisation routine itself. 
 
The impact of the weighting factor for the ecosys-
tem value component has already been discussed. 
Similarly the need to initiate the open loop rou-
tine with different starting values of F to ensure 
that the optimisation was converging on a global 
minimum was stressed at the start of the work-
shop. The importance of doing this is well illus-
trated in the chapter by Mackinson. In his study 
he demonstrated that different starting values of 
F generated considerably different estimates of 
the optimal management strategy and he used 
these results to identify an initialisation option 
and procedure that achieved consistent results. 
 
The sensitivity of the model behaviour to the as-
sumed values of the vulnerability settings was 
also stressed at the outset of the workshop and 
this is clearly illustrated in several of the chapters, 
including those by Martell and his co-authors, 
Buchary et al. , Mackinson and Shannon. Shan-
non, for example, estimated optimal fishing mor-
talities for the pelagic fleet in the southern Ben-
guela ecosystem that varied by a factor of ap-
proximately 6 in order to achieve the ‘compro-
mise’ strategy, depending on whether the vulner-
ability factor was set at 0.4 or 0.7 across the eco-
system.  Mackinson suggested that there was no 
clear pattern in the relationship between flow 
control and the estimated resilience of a species 
or species group to fishing and he advised caution 
in interpretation, suggesting that ‘once a particu-
lar policy has been chosen, the response to 
changes in the assumptions of flow control should 
be thoroughly examined’. The implications of this 
are that the different policies, or strategies, being 
considered need to be examined in an iterative 
manner, comparing their performance under a 
range of sensitivity tests. The final strategy to be 
selected must be the one that performs best under 
Page 10, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
the range of feasible parameter values and as-
sumptions, and that is robust to the major uncer-
tainties. 
 
The overall conclusions for anyone considering 
using the EwE policy search routine to explore 
possible management strategies seriously is that 
it is a powerful and sophisticated tool, and there-
fore, as with all comparable models, one that 
n e e d s  t o  b e  u s e d  c a r e f u l l y  a n d  w i t h  c o m m o n  
sense, not as a simple recipe book. The user must 
be conversant with the principles of non-linear 
optimisation and must follow the practices and 
guidelines that apply to such statistical tests. 
Without cautious, thoughtful and active use of the 
software, the probability of dangerously mislead-
ing results and conclusions is far greater than that 
of obtaining sensible and meaningful informa-
tion.     
 
Reporting 
 
The results of the investigations described above 
are discussed in this Report under the chapters 
prepared by the participants on the ecosystem 
they were working with. In some cases, the au-
thors were able to undertake the basic simula-
tions and sensitivity tests described above and to 
go beyond, considering other, more site-specific, 
management objectives. In other cases the par-
ticipants found they did not have the time to go 
beyond the common base-case simulations. Given 
these discrepancies in progress, it was not possi-
ble at the workshop to complete the final task that 
had been planned, which was to examine the re-
sults of the simulations for the different ecosys-
tems to see whether any common or emergent 
properties could be identified across ecosystems. 
However, some authors are continuing their in-
vestigations and it is planned to publish these ex-
tended investigations as  a book, including an 
overall comparison and synthesis based on those 
on-going investigations.  
 
References 
 
Cochrane, K. L., Butterworth, D. S., De Oliveira, J. A. 
A., and Roel, B. A  1998. Management procedures 
in a fishery based on highly variable stocks and with 
conflicting objectives: expe riences in the South Af-
rican pelagic fishery. Reviews in Fish Biology and 
Fisheries, 8:  177-214. 
Hilborn, R., and Walters, C. J. 1992. Quantitative fish-
eries stock assessment. Ch oice, dynamics and un-
certainty. Chapman & Hall, New York. 570 pp. 
Walters, C., V. Christensen and D. Pauly  1997. Struc-
turing dynamic models of exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balance assessments. Reviews in 
Fish Biology and Fisheries 7: 139-172. 
 
 
 
 
 FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 11  
  
Searching for optimum fishing 
strategies for fishery development, 
recovery and sustainability
 
 
 
Carl J. Walters, V. Christensen  
and Daniel Pauly 
Fisheries Centre, UBC 
 
Abstract 
 
Policy may be defined as an approach towards reaching 
a broadly defined goal. In fisheries, policies are often 
implemented via total allowable catches, TACs, that are 
recalculated annually, and through regulations that af-
fect fleet and deployment. The task of fisheries scien-
tists should be to advise both on policy formulation and 
on its implementation. However, so far ecosystem-
based policy explorations have rarely been conducted. 
This can, however, now be addressed by the recent de-
velopment of a policy exploration routine for the Eco-
path with Ecosim approach and software. The paper 
gives an overview of the background for the policy 
search, and how it has been implemented. A brief over-
view of a new routine for examining uncertainty in the 
management process is also included.
 
 
 
 
On Policy Exploration using  
Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) 
 
A central aim of fisheries management is to regu-
late fishing mortality rate s over time so as to 
achieve economic, social, legal and ecological sus-
tainability objectives. An important dynamic 
modeling and assessment objective is to provide 
insight about how high these mortality rates 
should be, and how they should be varied over 
time (at least during development or recovery 
from past overfishing).  We cannot expect models 
to provide very precise estimates of optimum 
fishing mortality rates, but we should at least be 
able to define reasonable and prudent ranges for 
the rates. The impacts of alternative time patterns 
of fishing mortalities can be explored using two 
different approaches in Ecosim: 
 
1. Fishing rates can be ‘sketched’ over time in 
the Ecosim simulation interface, and simulated 
results (catches, economic performance indica-
tors, biomass changes) examined for each sketch.  
This is using Ecosim in a ‘gaming’ mode, where 
the aim is to encourage rapid exploration of op-
tions. 
 
2. Formal optimization methods can be used to 
search for time patterns of fishing rates (actually, 
relative fishing efforts by fishing fleet/gear types), 
which would maximize particular performance 
measures or ‘objective functions’ for manage-
ment. 
 
These approaches can be used in combination, 
e.g. by doing a formal optimization search then 
‘reshaping’ the fishing rate estimates from this 
s e a r c h  i n  o r d e r  t o  m e e t other objectives besides 
those recognized during the search process. 
 
The first of these approaches is what has up to 
n o w  b e e n  t h e  s t a n d a r d  s i m u l a t i o n  f o r m  i n  E c o -
sim, and does not require further description 
here, (see Walters  et al. , 1997; Christensen  et al. , 
2000; Walters  et al. , 2000). The newly added 
formal optimization involves three steps: 
 
1. Define blocks of fleet/year groupings to be in-
cluded in the search procedure; 
2. Define objective functi on weights for the four 
optimization objectives: 
(i) net economic value (total landed value of catch 
minus total operating cost to take this landed 
value);  
(ii) employment (a social  indicator, assumed pro-
portional to gross landed value of catch for each 
fleet with a different jobs/landed value ratio for 
each fleet);  
(iii) mandated rebuilding of target species (obtained 
by  setting a threshold biomass for the relevant 
species relative to their biomass in Ecopath); 
(iv) ecological ‘stability’ (measured by assign-ing a 
weighting factor to each group based on their 
longevity, and optimizing for the weighted sum). 
3.  Invoke the search procedure by clicking the 
search button. 
 
When a search has been completed, the resulting 
‘optimum’ fishing rates by year/fleet block are 
transferred to the Ecosim ‘Temporal Simulation’, 
where the optimized fishing rates will have re-
placed the baseline (or previously sketched) rela-
tive efforts by fleet/gear type. 
 
Methodology 
 
Invoking the search option causes Ecosim to use a 
nonlinear optimization procedure known as the 
Davidson-Fletcher-Powell (DFP) method to itera-
tively improve an objective function by changing 
relative fishing rates, where each year/fleet block 
defines one parameter to be varied by the proce-
dure, (e.g., setting four color code blocks means a 
4-parameter nonlinear search).  DFP runs the 
Ecosim model repeatedly while varying these pa-
rameters.   
 
The parameter variation scheme used by DFP is 
known as a ‘conjugate-gradient’ method, which 
involves testing alternative parameter values so as 
to locally approximate the objective function as a 
Page 12, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
quadratic function of the parameter values, and 
using this approximation to make parameter up-
date steps.  It is one of the more efficient algo-
rithms for complex and hi ghly nonlinear optimi-
zation problems like the one of finding a best fish-
ing pattern over time for a nonlinear dynamic 
model. 
 
Nonlinear optimization methods like DFP can be 
tricky to use, and can give grossly misleading re-
sults. In particular the method can ‘hang up on a 
local maximum’, and can give extreme answers 
due to an inappropriate objective function.  To 
check for false converge to local maxima, an op-
tion to use random starting F’s should be used in 
addition to forcing additional iterations using the 
option to redo the analysis based on the current 
F’s. To test for sensitivity of the results to objec-
tive function parameters, searches for a variety of 
values of the objective function weights and pa-
rameters should be accessed.  
 
The objective function can be thought of as a 
‘multi-criterion object ive’, represented as a 
weighted sum of four criterion components or in-
dicators: economic, social, legal, and ecological.  
Assigning alternative weights to these compo-
nents is a way to see how they conflict or tradeoff 
with one another in terms of policy choice.  For 
example: 
 
(a) placing a high weight on the net economic value 
component (total fishing pr ofits) typically causes 
the optimization to favor lower fleet sizes and se-
vere simplification of the simulated ecosystem to 
maximize production of only those species that are 
most profitable to harvest;  
 
(b) placing a high weight on the employment (social) 
indicator typically results in favoring larger fleet 
sizes, and again often severe ecological simplifica-
tion in order to maximize production for the fleet 
that employs the most people.
 
 
External pressure, (e.g. in form of legal decisions) 
may force policy makers to concentrate on pre-
serving or rebuilding the population of a given 
species in a given area. In Ecosim, this corre-
sponds to setting a threshold biomass (relative to 
the biomass in Ecopath) and identifying the fleet 
structure that will ensure this objective. The im-
plication of this policy tends to be case-specific, 
and to depend on the trophic role of the group 
whose biomass is to be rebuilt.  
 
The ecosystem criterion component is inspired by 
the work of E.P. Odum (1971) in terms of ‘matur-
ity,’ wherein mature ecosystems are dominated by 
large, long-lived organisms. This is implemented 
in Ecosim by identifying the fleet structure that 
maximizes the biomass of long-lived organisms, 
as defined by the inverse of their produc-
tion/biomass ratios. The optimization of ecosys-
tem ‘health’ optimization often implies phasing 
out of all fisheries except those targeting species 
with low weighting factors. 
 
The search procedure results in what control sys-
tems analysts call an ‘open loop policy’, i.e. a pre-
scription for what to do at different future times 
without reference to what the system actually 
ends up doing along the way to those times.  It 
would obviously be crazy to just apply an open 
loop policy blindly over time, each year commit-
ting a fishery to fishing rates calculated at some 
past time from only the data available as of that 
time.   
 
In practice, actual management needs to be im-
plemented using ‘feedback policies’ where harvest 
goals are adjusted over time as new information 
becomes available and in response to unpredicted 
ecological changes due to environmental factors.  
But this need for feedback in application does not 
m e a n  t h a t  o p e n  l o o p  p o l i c y  c a l c u l a t i o n s  a r e  u s e -
less: rather, we see the open loop calculations as 
being done regularly over time as new informa-
tion becomes available, to keep providing a gen-
eral blueprint (or directional guidance) for where 
the system can/should be heading.  Also, we can 
often gain valuable insight about the functional 
form of better feedback policies, (how to relate 
harvest rates to changes in abundance as these 
changes occur) by examining how the open loop 
fishing rates vary with changes in abundance, es-
pecially when the open loop calculations are done 
with Ecosim ‘time forcing’ to represent possible 
changes in environmental conditions and produc-
tivity in the future. For an example of this ap-
p r o a c h  t o  d e s i g n  o f  p o l i c i e s  f o r  d e a l i n g  w i t h  d e -
cadal-scale variation in ocean productivity for 
single species management, see Walters and 
Parma (1996).
 
 
Maximizing Risk-averse Log Utility for 
Economic and Existence Values 
 
One option in the search procedure for optimum 
fishing patterns is to search for relative fleet sizes 
that would maximize a utility function of the form 
w
1⋅log(NPV) + w 2⋅S⋅log(B) - w 3⋅V, where the w i’s 
are utility weights chosen by the user, and the 
utility components NPV, S ⋅log(B), and V are de-
fined as: 
 
(1) NPV is net present economic value of harvests, 
calculated as discounted sum over all fleets and 
times of catches times prices minus costs of fish-
ing, i.e., the discounted total profit from fishing 
the ecosystem. 
 FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 13  
  
(2) S⋅log(B) is an existence value index for all compo-
nents of the ecosystem over time.  It is calculated 
as the discounted sum over times and biomass 
pools of user-entered structure weights times logs 
of biomasses, scaled to per-time and per-pool by 
dividing the sum by the number of simulation 
years and number of living biomass pools. 
 
(3) V is a variance measure for the prediction of 
log(NPV) + S ⋅log(B).  It is assumed to be propor-
tional to how severely the ecosystem is disturbed 
away from the Ecopath base state, where distur-
bance is measured at each time in the simulation 
by the multidimensional distance of the ecosystem 
biomass state from the Ecopath base state.  This 
term is negative, implyi ng that increased uncer-
tainty about the predictions for more severe dis-
turbances causes a decrease in the mean of 
log(NPV). The term repres ents both aversion to 
management portfolio choices that have high vari-
ance in predicted returns, and the observation that 
the mean of the log of a random variable (NPV⋅PB) 
is approximately equal to the log of the mean of 
that variable minus ½ the variance of the variable.   
Large w
3-values can be used to represent both 
high uncertainty about predictions that involve 
large deviations of biomass from the Ecopath base 
state, and strong risk aversion to policy choices 
that have high uncertainty.
 
 
This utility function combines several basic con-
cepts of utility.  First, the log scaling of value 
components represents the notion of “diminish-
ing returns”, that adding some amount to any 
value measure is less important when the value 
measure is already large than it is when the value 
measure is small.  Second, the log scaling also 
represents the notion of “balance”, that no value 
component should be ignored entirely (unless it is 
assigned a zero w
i); the overall utility measure 
approaches minus infinity if either net economic 
performance (NPV) or if any biomass component 
of the ecosystem (any biomass B
i in S ⋅log(B)) ap-
proaches zero. Third, it represents the notion that 
our predictions about the future of both economic 
performance and biodiversity (biomasses) be-
come progressively more uncertain for policies 
that result in more extreme departures from the 
Ecopath base state about which we presume to 
have at least some knowledge.   
 
In the terminology of portfolio selection theory in 
economics, fishing policies result in a portfolio of 
value components with “expected total returns on 
investment” equal to NPV + S⋅B.  But policies that 
have higher expected tota l returns are most often 
also ones that would push the ecosystem into 
more extreme states, and hence represent portfo-
lio choices with higher variance in total returns.   
 
For example, maximizing the deterministic pre-
diction of NPV in Ecosim often involves a ‘farm-
ing policy’, in which fishing is deployed so as to 
severely simplify the ecosystem to maximize pro-
duction of one or a few species that appear at pre-
sent to be the most valuable (price, potential total 
catch).  This may even involve deploying some 
fleets just to remove predators and competitors 
for the most valued species, just like deploying 
pesticides and herbicides to remove “pests” in ag-
ricultural systems.  But simplifying an ecosystem 
in such ways can make the behavior of the system 
deeply unpredictable, by creating opportunities 
for ecological response (population growth) by a 
variety of species that are rare in the “normal” 
ecosystem, and hence are not well researched or 
understood in terms of th eir potential impacts on 
valued species should they become abundant. 
   
Simplifying an ecosystem is hence much like in-
vesting in high-risk, high-return stock market op-
tions; such investments may make you rich, but 
t h e y  m a y  a l s o  b a n k r u p t  y o u .   M o s t  p e o p l e  a r e  
risk-averse as investors, and seek to “spread risk” 
by investing in “balanced portfolios” with lower 
expected returns on investment but much lower 
probabilities of severe loss. 
 
The prediction variance measure V is not meant 
to represent all components of variation or uncer-
tainty about future biomasses and fishery values.  
V  g o e s  t o  z e r o  f o r  p o l i c i e s  t h a t  h o l d  o r  m a i n t a i n  
the ecosystem at the Ecopath base state B
o for 
every biomass, for all simulation times.  It is ob-
viously not correct to suggest that we would ex-
pect no variance in future biomasses (and hence 
in the harvest components of NPV as well) if such 
a policy were implemented.  Imagine running a 
very large number of simulations of future bio-
mass changes under such a policy, while varying 
all possible uncertain quantities such as the Eco-
path base biomasses and biomass accumulation 
rates, productivities, Ecosim vulnerability pa-
rameters, environmental forcing inputs repre-
senting oceanographic productivity regimes, fu-
ture demand and price patterns, and changing 
vulnerabilities to fishing due to biophysical and 
technological factors.  Even for the baseline policy 
where Ecosim predicts stable (‘flat line trajec-
tory’) expected or mean biomasses over time, 
these simulations would likely reveal high vari-
ances and complex covariance patterns for most 
biomasses over time, i.e. we would see wide prob-
ability distributions of possible future biomass 
states for the ecosystem.  We should not be arro-
gant enough to suggest that we can describe all 
the uncertainties well enough to accurately calcu-
late the variances of such distributions.  But note 
that much of that variance in predictions of future 
biomasses, (and hence variance in the value com-
ponents) would be due to sources of uncertainty 
Page 14, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
and variability that are the same no matter what 
the policy choice, i.e., would cause about the same 
amount of variance in predictions for any future 
harvest policy that we might simulate.   
 
When comparing policy choices using an optimi-
zation objective function, there is no point in in-
cluding extra constant terms that do not change 
with the policy variables, (e.g., a base variance V
o 
in predictions that does not change with fishing 
rate policy and just repr esents uncertainty about 
any prediction that Ecosim might make).  Hence 
the V distance measure is meant to represent only 
extra variance or uncertainty in predictions for 
policy scenarios that would likely drive biomasses 
far from the Ecopath mean state. 
 
Note that Ecosim does not deliberately advocate 
or promote any particular  risk-averse portfolio 
approach to public investment in ecosystem har-
vest and existence values.  Rather, it provides the 
logarithmic utility function option so that users 
who do have highly risk-averse attitudes about 
ecosystem values can identify policy options that 
would better meet their objectives.  Users should 
always construct a series of policy scenarios with 
varying utility weights w
1, w 2, and w 3 on the log 
utility components, to see how placing different 
emphases on these components would alter the 
predicted best policy choice. 
 
Use of these functions for policy exploration will 
generally involve some balance between these ob-
jectives. Indeed, identifying the weighting factors 
to be given to each of these objectives may be the 
most valuable aspect of this Ecosim routine.  
 
Thus, to assist the user in achieving this, the 
starting values of the objective functions have 
each been standardized relative to their base val-
ues (from Ecopath), making them roughly com-
parable. The first two of these measures tend to 
pull towards increasing fishing effort, while the 
two others tend to pull towards reducing effort. 
Care should be taken to consider this balance 
when giving relative weightings to the objectives. 
Also note that the optimizations should be per-
formed with a range of weighting factors for each 
objective function, rather than with single values, 
which may miss a well-balanced solution ( see 
Cochrane, this volume). 
 
Open-loop Policy Simulations 
 
The fishing policy search interface of EwE de-
scribed above estimates time series of relative 
fleet sizes that maximize a multi-criterion objec-
tive function that includes net economic value, 
social employment value, mandated rebuilding, 
and ecological stability criteria.  In Ecosim, the 
relative fleet sizes are used to calculate relative 
fishing mortality rates by each fleet type, assum-
ing the mix of fishing rates over biomass groups 
remains constant for each fleet type, (i.e. reducing 
a fleet type by some percentage results in the 
same percentage decrease in the fishing rates that 
i t  c a u s e s  o n  a l l  t h e  g r o u p s  t h a t  i t  c a t c h e s ) .  T h e  
fisheries and ecosystem may be simulated with 
Ecosim using the solution found in the policy 
search interface: this is termed an ‘open loop’ 
simulation.  
 
Note that when density-dependent catchability ef-
fects are included in the simulations, reductions 
in biomass for a group may result in fishing rate 
remaining high despite reductions in total effort 
by any/all fleets that harvest it. Despite this ca-
veat, the basic philosophy in the fishing policy 
search interface is that future management will be 
based on control of relative  fishing efforts by fleet 
type, rather than on multispecies quota systems.  
It is in any case not yet clear that there is any way 
to implement multispecies quotas safely, without 
either using some arbitrary conservative rule like 
closing the fleet when it reaches the quota for the 
first (weakest) species take n, or alternatively al-
lowing wasteful discarding of species once their 
quotas are reached. 
 
If future multispecies management is indeed im-
plemented by regulation of fleet fishing efforts so 
as to track time-varying fishing mortality rate tar-
gets as closely as possible, then a key practical is-
sue is how to monitor changes in gear efficiency 
(catchability coefficients) so as to set effort limits 
each year that account for such changes in effi-
ciency.  Such monitoring is particularly important 
for fisheries that can show strong density-
d e p e n d e n c e  i n  c a t c h a b i l i t y ,  s u c h  t h a t  a  u n i t  o f  
fishing effort takes a much higher proportion of 
some stocks (exerts a higher fishing mortality rate 
per unit of effort) when stock size(s) is/are small. 
 
There are at least two possible ways to monitor 
the changes in catchability (gear efficiency) dis-
cussed above. Both are based on monitoring fish-
ing mortality rates F
t over time, and using the re-
lationship q t=Ft/ft, where q t is fishing rate per 
unit effort and ft is effort.   
 
The first approach is to do traditional biomass 
stock assessments each year, and to estimate F
t as 
Ft=Ct/Bt, where C t is total catch and B t is esti-
mated vulnerable stock biomass.  The second ap-
proach is to directly mo nitor the fishing mortality 
rate, estimating probabilities of harvest using 
methods such as annual tagging experiments and 
within-year estimates of relative decrease in fish 
 FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 15  
  
abundance during fishing ‘seasons’. 
 
Closed-loop Policy Simulations  
 
Ecosim allows users to perform ‘closed loop pol-
icy simulations’ to evaluate the monitoring alter-
natives discussed above. The evaluations produce 
time series of biomasses, and also the objective 
function value components used in searches for 
optimum long-term fishing rate plans. ‘Closed 
loop’ simulations model not only the ecological 
dynamics over time, but also the dynamics of the 
stock assessment and regula tory process. That is, 
a closed loop simulation includes ‘submodels’ for 
the dynamics of assessment (data gathering, ran-
dom and systematic errors in biomass and fishing 
rate estimates) and for the implementation of as-
sessment results through limitation of annual 
fishing efforts. 
 
As part of this routine the EwE ‘closed loop policy 
simulation’ model, allows specification of: 
  
1. how many closed loop stochastic simulation trials to 
do;  
2. the type of annual assessment to be used (F=C/B ver-
sus F directly from tags);  
3. the accuracy of the annual assessment procedures 
(coefficient of variation of annual biomass or F esti-
mates, by stock); and 
4. the value or importance weights for the Fs caused on 
various species by each fishing fleet.   
 
The value weights are used for each fleet/species 
combination to calculate a weighted average 
catchability, q t, for each  fleet type, recognizing 
that some species may be more important than 
others in terms of the effect that they might be al-
l o w e d  t o  h a v e  o n  e f f o r t  r e d u c t i o n  s h o u l d  q  i n -
crease over time. For example, setting a zero 
gear/species weight tells the closed loop simula-
tion to ignore any increases that might occur in 
the catchability of that species when calculating 
changes over time in fishing power for that fleet.  
Setting a high weight (>>1) tells the system to 
watch the species very closely when assessing 
changes in fishing power or impact for the fleet.  
Internally, this calculation is done by setting 
 
q
it=(Sj⋅wij⋅Fijt/(Sj⋅wij))/Fit  
 
for each fleet i, where the sum is over species j 
and the w ij represent importance weights for the 
species-specific fishing rates F ijt estimated for 
simulation year t. 
 
Closed loop policy simulations could obviously 
include a wide range of complications related to 
the details of annual stock assessment proce-
dures, survey designs, and methods for direct F 
estimation.  We assume that users will use other 
assessment modeling tools to examine these de-
tails, and so need only enter overall performance 
information (coefficients of variation in esti-
mates) into the ecosystem-scale analysis. 
 
In concluding, we remark that the simulations 
tools described here may he lp to engage fisheries 
scientists in a discussion of how we are to manage 
ecosystems, not just fisheries, and what the impli-
cations are of the choices made.
   
 
References 
 
Christensen, V., Walters, C.  J., and Pauly, D. 2000. 
Ecopath with Ecosim: a User's Guide, October 
2000 Edition. Fisheries Cent re, University of Brit-
ish Columbia, Vancouver, Canada and ICLARM, 
Penang, Malaysia. 130 pp. 
Odum, E. P. 1971. Fundamentals of Ecology. W.B. 
Saunders Co, Philadelphia. 574 pp.  
Walters, C., Christensen, V., and Pauly, D. 1997. Struc-
turing dynamic models of  exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balance assessments. Reviews 
in Fish Biology and Fisheries 7(2): 139-172.  
Walters, C., and Parma, A. M.   1996. Fixed exploitation 
rate strategies for coping with effects of climate 
change. Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic 
Sciences 53(1): 148-158.  
Walters, C., Pauly, D., Christensen, V., and Kitchell, J. 
F. 2000. Representing density dependent conse-
quences of life history strategies in aquatic ecosys-
tems: EcoSim II. Ecosystems 3(1): 70-83.  
 
Page 16, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Simulating Fisheries Management 
Strategies in the Strait of Georgia 
Ecosystem using  
Ecopath and Ecosim
 
 
 
Steven J. D. Martell, Alasdair I. Beattie, 
Carl J. Walters, Tarun Nayar* and  
Robyn Briese* 
Fisheries Centre and *Oceanography Dept, UBC  
 
Abstract 
 
Historically, the Strait of Georgia supported a wide va-
riety of commercial, sport and native fisheries, many of 
which are now depleted or declining. Here, we use 
Ecopath with Ecosim to simulate various management 
policies and analyze their consequences. We first con-
struct an ecosystem model that represents the dynam-
ics of a simplified Strait of Georgia model and then 
proceed to ask the question “if we could repeat history, 
what set of harvest policies, for specific fishing fleets, 
would best represent an omniscient policy?”. More spe-
cifically, if we had perfect information about trophic in-
teractions, primary producti vity regimes, and changes 
in catchability, then what is the ‘best’ approximate pol-
icy for optimizing economic, social and ecosystem sta-
bility goals? Furthermore, how sensitive are these poli-
cies to uncertainties in trophic dynamics?
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Historically, the Strait of Georgia (SoG) was a 
productive ecosystem supporting some of the 
world’s largest commercial, sports, and First Na-
tions’ fisheries. The Fraser River, the centerpiece 
of the SoG, is the main source of freshwater for 
many anadromous residents of the SoG, including 
salmon, eulachon, and tomcod. The SoG is con-
nected to the Pacific Ocean via the Strait of Juan 
de Fuca and Haro Straits in the South, and the 
Johnstone Strait in the North. The SoG is an 
eclectic mix of oceanographic features such as: a 
large estuarine environment, strong tidal cur-
rents, connections to many fjord environments, 
and a large fetch that allows for wind mixing. In 
recent years, many of the once bountiful commer-
cial fisheries have been closed due to depressed 
stocks, and the sports fishery has been severely 
restricted. In the last deca de, scientists have been 
searching for explanations for the decline of many 
stocks, but much of this effort has been focused 
on explaining variation observed in single species 
stock assessment programs. The only attempt, 
thus far, at compiling all of the evidence for 
changes in the SoG ecosystem is a report entitled 
“Back to the Future: Reconstructing the Strait of 
Georgia Ecosystem” (Pauly et al.  1 9 9 8 ) .  W e  u s e  
this report as a foundation for examining the dy-
namic changes that have occurred in the SoG over 
the last 50 years. 
 
The SoG ecosystem has been heavily exploited for 
the last 90 years and development in commercial 
fisheries has shifted the focus from top predators 
in the ecosystem to more abundant lower trophic 
level species (Wallace 1998). This phenomenon is 
known as ‘fishing down food webs’ (Pauly et al.  
1998, Pauly et al. 2000). Salmon fisheries were by 
far the most important fishery in the early years 
of fishing development, and by 1897, British Co-
lumbia was canning more than 1 million cases of 
salmon a year (Lichatowich 1999). Both chinook 
and coho salmon have been heavily exploited in 
the SoG by the commercial net and troll fisheries, 
and by sports fisheries (DFO 1999a, DFO 1999b). 
With almost all SoG coho stock jeopardised, in 
1998 a coast-wide closure for all fisheries was im-
plemented for coho, with the exception of a sports 
fishery for hatchery fish at the mouth of the Capi-
lano River.  
 
As fishing technologies improved, herring fisher-
ies and ground fish fisheries grew rapidly in the 
20
th century, with precipitous results. By the early 
1960s, herring stocks were being harvested at un-
sustainable rates and the fishery collapsed in 1967 
(Stocker 1993). Since this  time, however, herring 
stocks have recovered to near historically high 
levels (Schweigert et al. 1998). Prior to 1970, her-
ring were mainly fished for use in the production 
of fishmeal, but after the collapse of the fishery a 
more valuable roe fishery was developed. 
Groundfish, such as lingcod and several rockfish 
species, were also heavily exploited back in the 
1900s, and with the introduction of trawl fisheries 
to the SoG in 1943, exploitation rates rose dra-
matically (Cass et al. 1990, Martell 1999). Inver-
tebrate fisheries have also existed in the SoG for 
the last 100 years, however, up until the 1950s the 
fisheries were mainly focused on dungeness crabs 
and manilla clams (an exotic species). Since the 
1950s, there have been developments in shrimp 
fisheries, geoduck clams, sea urchin, sea cucum-
bers and octopus fisheries (Ketchen 1983). 
 
With the exception of the collapse in the herring 
fisheries and now coho fisheries, stock assess-
ment reports have attributed observed declines in 
abundance to factors other than overfishing. In 
fact, more attention has been spent on trying to 
explain environmental processes that may have 
led to a reduction in marine survival rates in 
salmon, trends in changes of fish production 
(Beamish and Bouillon 1995), or changes in food 
availability associated wi th changes in physical 
 FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 17  
  
properties (Robinson 1999). At this time, the oc-
currence of a ‘regime’ shift, or long term changes 
in primary productivity in the Pacific Ocean 
(Beamish et al. 1999), is postulated as the major 
factor leading to abundance declines in the SoG. 
 
An obvious, but often unresolved, issue is the role 
of trophic interactions in suppressing recruitment 
or indirectly changing natural mortality rates 
(generally assumed to be constant). Among fish-
eries scientists and academia, there is a growing 
consensus that we can no longer forge ahead and 
exploit a resource without considering trophic in-
teractions at an ecosystem scale (Walters et al.  
1 9 9 7 ) .  T h e  m a j o r i t y  o f  d a t a  a v a i l a b l e ,  h o w e v e r ,  
are usually restricted to species of commercial 
importance. In the SoG alone for example, there 
are more than 250 different species of fish, but 
fisheries statistics are collected for less than 50 
species coast wide (vertebrate and invertebrate 
combined). Moreover, we have even less knowl-
edge about the specific interactions among mem-
bers in an ecosystem, a problem we are now 
forced to face. 
The objective of this paper is to first construct an 
ecosystem model that represents the dynamics of 
a simplified Strait of Georgia model and then pro-
ceed to ask the question “if we could repeat his-
tory, what set of harvest 
policies, for specific fishing 
fleets, would best represent 
an omniscient policy?”. 
More specifically, if we had 
perfect information about 
trophic interactions, pri-
mary productivity regimes, 
and changes in catchability, 
then what is the ‘best’ ap-
proximate policy for opti-
mizing economic, social 
and ecosystem stability 
goals? Furthermore, how 
sensitive are these policies 
to uncertainties in trophic 
dynamics? 
 
Strait of Georgia 
Ecopath Model 
 
T h i s  s t u d y  b u i l d s  o n  t h e  
model created for the Back 
to the Future project (Pauly 
et al.  1 9 9 8 ) .  W e  s t a r t e d  
with the present day model 
and made various changes 
both to better accommo-
date our assessment, and 
reflect recent developments 
in the software. The major 
change made was to split up Herring, Chinook, 
Coho and Hake into juvenile and adult groups. In 
addition, our Ecopath model is parameterized for 
the 1950 ’s  an d in  most  cas es, an  in cr ea se in  b io-
mass was required. One of the latest features of 
Ecosim allows for fitting specific groups to time 
series data, and to take advantage of this latest 
feature we explicitly represent coho, chinook, 
lingcod, herring, and hake as individual groups. 
The parameters used for the Ecopath model are 
represented in Table 1, and the corresponding 
diet matrix information is in Table 2. Except for 
the groups specified above, we have adopted the 
parameters from the Back to the Future project 
(Dalsgaard et al. 1998). 
 
R e c e n t  e v a l u a t i o n  o f  h e r r i n g  t a g g i n g  s t u d i e s  h a s  
demonstrated that a large fraction of the Strait of 
Georgia herring population undergoes annual mi-
grations (Hay et al. 1999). For this reason we use 
39.7% of the adult herrings diet as imported (Ta-
ble 2). Similarly, eulachon stocks from the Fraser 
River system also leave the SoG and we assume 
t h a t  4 0 %  o f  t h e i r  d i e t  i s  i m p o r t e d  ( D o u g  H a y ,  
Pers. Comm.).  
Table 1. Ecopath basic input parameters and es timated parameters (light shading -
italics) for the Strait of Georgia in 1950. Trophic levels are estimated from the diet 
matrix information (Table 2) and the vuln erability parameters are used in Ecosim 
and were estimated through a fitting procedure in Ecosim. 
 
 
Group 
Trophic 
level 
Biomass  
(t/km²) 
P/B  
(/year)
C/B 
(/year) 
Ecotrp. 
Effic. 
Fishery 
Land.
 
Vuln. 
Transient Orcas 5. 4 0.003 0.02 7.4 0 0 0.3 
Dolphins (Res. Orca) 4.1 0.04 0.02 7.3 0.555 0 0.3 
Seals Sealions 4.4 0.4 0.16 8.1 0.96 0.04 0.3 
Halibut 4.1 0.004 0.44 1.7 0.735 0.001 0.3 
Lingcod 4.2 5.591 0.39 1.2 0.168 0.273 0.357 
Dogfish Shark 3.7 6.5 0.1 2.5 0.033 0 0.3 
Ad. Hake 3.4 7.737 0.5 5 0.86 0 0.143 
Juv. Hake 3.1 2.321 2.48 9 0.596 0 0.01 
Ad. Res. Coho 3.8 0.198 1.3 3.24 0.955 0.12 0.3 
Juv. Res. Coho 3.3 0.838 2.4 7.3 0.475 0 0.4435 
Ad. Res. Chinook 3.8 0.33 1.4 5.475 0.951 0.296 0.3 
Juv. Res. Chinook 3.3 1.231 2.4 7.3 0.651 0 0 
Demersal Fishes 3.5 12.6 0.52 2.5 0.994 0 0.3 
Sea Birds 3.2 0.02 0.1 91.7 0.949 0 0.3 
Small Pelagics 3.2 2.852 2 18 0.95 0 0.3 
Eulachon 3.1 2.114 2 18 0.95 0 0.3 
Ad. Herring 3.2 16 0.67 6.3 0.917 7.22 0.3 
Juv. Herring 3 3.58 1.172 11.06 0.725 0 0.01 
Jellyfish 3 15 3 12 0.211 0 0.3 
Predatory Inverts 2.7 9.1 1.65 8.8 0.549 0 0.3 
Shellfish 2.1 220.5 0.5 5.6 0.776 0 0.3 
Grazing Inverts 2.1 400 3.5 23 0.55 0 0.3 
Carn. Zooplankton 2.4 12.94 12 40 0.95 0 0.3 
Herb. Zooplankton 2 24.68 25 183.3 0.95 0 0.3 
Kelp/Sea Grass 1 20.3 4.43 - 0.158 0 - 
Phytoplankton 1 65.2 200 - 0.6 0 - 
Detritus 1 1 - - 0.712 0 - 
Page 18, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
 
 
 
Table 2. Diet matrix used for the Strait of Georgia Ecosystem Model. 
 
 
Prey\ 
 
 
 
Predator 
Transient Orcas 
Dolphins (Res. 
Orca) 
Seals Sealions 
Halibut 
Lingcod 
Dogfish Shark 
Ad. Hake 
Jv. Hake 
Ad. Res. Coho 
Jv. Res. Coho 
Ad. Res. Chinook 
Jv. Res. Chinook 
Demersal Fishes 
Sea Birds 
Small Pelagics 
Eulachon 
Ad. Herring 
Jv. Herring 
Jellyfish 
Predatory Inver-
tebrates 
Shellfish 
Grazing Inverte-
brates 
Carn. Zooplank-
ton 
Herb. Zooplank-
ton 
Transient Orcas                         
Dolphins (Res. Orca) 0 . 0 2                         
Seals Sealions 0 . 4 6 7                         
Halibut  0 . 0 0 1                        
Lingcod  0.01 0.022  0.003                    
Dogfish Shark  0.001   0.003                    
Ad. Hake  0.2 0.265  0.129 0.045       0.027            
Jv. Hake   0.065  0.001 0.049 0.05    0.001  0.011    0.001        
Ad. Res. Coho  0.046 0.028  0.001 0.001                   
Jv. Res. Coho   0.056  0.007 0.001   0.001  0.001      0.001        
Ad. Res. Chinook  0.046 0.04                      
Jv. Res. Chinook   0.11   0.09   0.001  0.001      0.001        
Demersal Fishes  0.159 0.259 0.179 0.34 0.162   0.001  0.007  0.01 0.075   0.001  0.001      
Sea Birds 0.003             0.001           
Small Pelagics 0.01 0.192 0.082 0.498 0.023  0.01 0.025 0.2 6  0.1  0.095 0.077   0.005 0.001       
Eulachon  0.002 0.009 0.005 0.021 0.005 0. 005  0.018  0.017  0.048 0.004   0.01 0.001 0.005      
Ad. Herring  0.05 0.057 0.194 0.302 0.005 0.001  0.06  0.11   0.019           
Jv. Herring    0.005 0.009  0.001 0.005 0.2 0.001 0.36 0.005  0.01   0.01  0.005      
Jellyfish                   0 . 0 5 3      
Predatory Inverte-  0.146   0.042 0.01    0.012  0.051 0.144       0.034     
Shellfish   0.001   0.049       0.143 0.158    0.053  0.276  0.006   
Grazing Inverte-  0.147 0.001    0.133   0.012  0.021 0.285 0.536 0.1     0.315  0.079   
Carn. Zooplankton    0.119 0.08 0.584 0.75 0.12 0.38 0.731 0.39 6 0.615 0.19  0.5 0.25 0.192 0.212 0.105      
Herb. Zooplankton     0.04  0.05 0.85 0.078 0.244 0.006 0.308 0.048 0.03 0.4 0.3 0.383 0.637 0.739  0.095  0.4  
Kelp/Sea Grass                     0 . 0 0 2  0 . 0 0 1    
Phytoplankton              0.005  0.05  0.096 0.091  0.657 0.309 0.15 0.9 
Detritus              0.085      0.375 0.246 0.605 0.45 0.1 
Import 0 . 5                0 . 4  0 . 3 9         
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 19  
 
Biomass estimates for herring come from VPA re-
constructions (Schweigert et al. 1998), and we al-
low Ecopath to solve for eulachon biomass as-
suming an EE of 0.95 (see Table 1). 
 
Fisheries in the Strait of Georgia 
 
 For this analysis, we have defined six different 
fishing fleets: groundfish, salmon, herring, har-
b o u r  s e a l ,  h a k e  a n d  k r i l l .  T h e  g r o u n d  f i s h  f l e e t  
targets lingcod and halibut as well as a small 
component of the demersal fish group, mostly 
rockfish and flounder species. The salmon fleet is 
both commercial and recreational; here we ignore 
the highly migratory species such as sockeye and 
pink salmon. The herring fishery is a combination 
of the commercial gillnet and seine fishery. Up 
until 1970, the Department of Fisheries and 
Oceans offered a bounty on harbor seals. There 
are no published reports on the exploitation rates 
for harbor seals; howeve r, we have witnessed a 
substantial increase in abundance since the first 
population estimate in 1973. We choose a fixed 
fishing rate of 0.3 from 1950 to 1970 for the har-
bor seal fishery. The Pacific Hake fishery did not 
commence until 1975 in 
the Strait of Georgia, and 
the most recent fishery 
development is the krill 
(euphausiid) fishery that 
started in 1997. Krill are 
members of the carnivo-
rous zooplankton group.
 
 
Fitting Ecosim to 
Time Series Data 
 
For Hake, Lingcod, Her-
ring, Coho, Chinook and 
Harbor Seals, we fit the 
Ecosim model treating 
each data series as a rela-
tive abundance index. 
The Ecosim interface al-
lows the user to specify 
the search routine to ad-
just vulnerabilities, and/ 
or generate a time series 
of anomalies. This time 
series is then applied as a 
‘forcing function’ – that 
is, Ecosim is forced to try 
to match with these when 
predicting the next 
equilibria – to one or 
more groups. In this 
assessment, we allow the 
search routine to gen-
erate a time series of 
primary production 
anomalies. Note that such a time series of anomalies can be considered 
analogous to a recruitment anomaly time series in 
a single species stock assessment. The result of 
the fitting procedure is the generation of a pri-
mary production regime, and we use this regime 
in our analysis of optimal fishing policies. For 
comparison, our analysis incorporates some of 
the environmental uncertainty that in reality fish-
eries managers are faced with. 
 
 Fitting the salmon data required an additional 
forcing input on the salmon egg production to 
emulate the hatchery release programs that 
started in 1970. This function tripled juvenile 
salmon production by the early 1980s, and lev-
eled off from 1980 to present day. The present 
analysis does not investigate how hatchery inputs 
from the Puget Sound area may have influenced 
overall survival rates for juvenile salmon. Never-
theless, the increase juvenile salmon production 
from hatchery inputs leads to a predicted decline 
in juvenile survival rates for both species of 
salmon (Figure 1). Prior to 1970, much of the her-
ring dynamics is driven by high exploitation rates 
Figure 1.  Results of fitting Ecosim to time series data for the Strait of Georgia, from 
1950 to 1999. 
Page 20, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
during the days of the reduction fishery. Follow-
ing the closure of the fishery, herring populations 
in the SoG grew rapidly. By 1950, lingcod was 
probably already over-fished, and their continued 
decline up until 1990 can be attributed to the re-
maining handline vessels and sports fisheries that 
operate in the SoG. In 1990 the commercial ling-
cod fishery was closed, and size and bag limits 
were imposed on the sports fishery. It is possible 
that the rapidly growing seal population is, in 
part, responsible for the failure of lingcod to re-
cover. 
 
Searching for Optimal Fishing Policies 
 
In the EwE software, we used the fishing policy 
search routine to examine alternative fishing poli-
cies for the six fisheries (Table 3). The harbor seal 
culling program, which has been abandoned since 
1970, was left in place as an option for predator 
control programs in the future. Where applicable, 
sports fisheries (mostly salmon and rockfish) 
were included into fishing rates calculated for 
commercial fisheries. The fishing policy optimiza-
tion routine uses a Flet cher-Powell non-linear 
search routine to search for optimal fishing rates 
for each fishery, while maximizing an objective 
function that incorporates economics, social and 
ecosystem stability. 
Each component in 
the objective func-
tion is arbitrarily 
weighted for impor-
tance. For the eco-
nomic objective we 
used a 4% discount 
rate. The social em-
ployment weights 
for each fisher are 
shown in Table 3. 
To assign values to 
each component in 
the ecosystem, we 
use 1/PB ratio as the 
weight (now the de-
fault setting in Eco-
sim) for the ecosys-
tem stability crite-
rion. 
We examine five different fishing policies. First 
we maximize the objective function for econom-
ics, social, ecological stability, and ‘the big trade-
off’ – all three weighted equally. Finally we com-
pare the results of these four scenarios to the 
‘status quo’ situation. Status quo refers to the 
fishing rates defined in the 1950 Ecopath base 
model. In our assessment of optimal fishing poli-
cies, we evaluate economic, social and ecosystem 
stability objective functions in terms of percent of 
the status quo (or baseline fishing rates used in 
Ecopath). 
 
Results of Optimal Fishing Policy Search 
 
The objective function values, expressed as per-
centages of the status quo values, achieved from 
the optimal fishing search routine are summa-
rized in Figure 2.  
 
 Maximizing economic value led to a growth in all 
fisheries, except the herring fishery that was re-
duced by 40% (note that this is the most valuable 
single species west coast fishery). This analysis, 
however, assumes equal value for all species 
landed; therefore, the search routine is simply 
maximizing the total catch of all species. Fur-
thermore, during the 1950’s fishing mortality 
rates on herring were re latively high (F~0.41), 
and are not sustainable at this rate. When maxi-
mizing both social and economic objective func-
tions independently, there was a decrease in eco-
system stability. In contrast, when maximizing 
ecosystem stability there is a decline in economic 
and social values.  
 
Maximizing ecosystem stability leads to a large 
increase in the groups that have slow turnover 
Table 3. Social employment weights by fishery type. 
 
Fishery sector Jobs/catch 
Ground fish fisheries 2 
Salmon fisheries 20 
Herring fisheries 10 
Seal-culling 1 
Hake fisheries 5 
Euphausid fisheries 5 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Maxim ize Net
Econ om ic V a lu e
Maxim ize Social
Value
Maxim ize Ecosy stem
Stability
Maxim ize All
Attributes
Relative Fishing Rates
Ground Fish Salmon Herring Seals Hake Kr ill
Figure 2. Open loop results of the Fishing Policy  Optimization routine in Ecosim from 
1950 to 2000 with environmental variability incorporated. Objective function values are 
reported as a percent of the status quo objective function values. 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 21  
 
rates (killer whales 
and birds); how-
ever, when we 
maximize all objec-
tive functions the 
overall value in-
creases over the 
status quo situa-
tion. In fact, there 
are no differences 
in ecosystem stabil-
ity values between 
the ecosystem sta-
bility maximization 
and maximizing all 
attributes (Figure 
2), yet substantial 
improvements in economic and social values are 
gained from the latter scenario. This difference 
occurs because when maximizing the ecosystem 
stability objective, the optimization routine essen-
tially shuts down all fisheries (Figure 3), resulting 
in economic and social losses, while attaining 
large gains in the slow turnover species. In con-
trast, when maximizing all values, economic and 
social gains are made up through large increases 
in krill, hake and ground fish fisheries (Figure 3). 
 
Implementing Optimal 
Fishing Policies 
 
Implementing the optimal fishing policies above 
was carried out using a closed loop simulation 
routine, where uncertainties in stock size estima-
tion and improvements in capture rates due to 
density dependent catchability and/or improve-
ments in fishing technology are incorporated. In 
the closed loop simulations we use a coefficient of 
variation of 50% for biomass estimates, allow 
catchability to increase at a maximum rate of 10% 
per year, and use the mean objective function val-
ues from 50 model runs. The results of the closed 
loop simulations are presented in Table 4, where 
the percentages represent the fraction of the 
values obtained from the open loop simulations 
shown in Figure 1. For example, if we were to 
implement the fishing policy suggested by 
maximizing all attributes, then we would expect, 
on average, to achieve 93% of the over-
all value shown in Figure 1. In other 
words, due to uncertainty in estimating 
stock size and changes in catchability, 
we can expect to loose 7% of the overall 
value in comparison to having perfect 
information. 
 
The values obtained in Table 4 are 
likely unreasonably high. In general we 
w o u l d  e x p e c t  m o r e  t h a n  2 5 %  o f  a  l o s s  
in anyone of these values due to uncertainty in 
stock size and changes in catchability. However, 
in our analysis, the shellfish and carnivorous zoo-
plankton groups dominate the biomass in the 
model and also have either no long-term fisheries 
or no fisheries associated with them. These two 
groups alone, even with relatively small impor-
tance weights, dominate the ecosystem stability 
index. It is unclear, at this moment, as to why the 
economic objective function values increase over 
the open loop values. 
 
Sensitivity of Fishing Policies to  
Vulnerabilities 
 
We carried out a simple sensitivity analysis to see 
how sensitive optimized fishing policies are to 
uncertainties in estimating the vulnerability pa-
rameters. In our analysis  we used the optimized 
fishing policy that maximizes all objective func-
tions, then re-ran the model using a range of vul-
nerabilities from 0.2 to 0.6. Note here that after 
changing the vulnerabilities we did not re-
optimize the fishing fleets because we are inter-
ested in how robust the fishing policy is to uncer-
tainty in the vulnerability parameters. 
 
Figure 4 shows the relative values of the open 
loop objective functions over a range of vulner-
abilities. Increasing the vulnerability parameters 
increases all objective function values. The gen-
Table 4. Results of implementing various fishing policies given uncer-
tainty in estimating stock size and changes in catchability. Percentages 
represent fraction of the values obta ined in the open loop simulation 
(Figure 1). 
 Maximize 
net eco-
nomic value
Maximize 
social 
value 
Maximize 
ecosystem 
stability 
Maximize 
all attrib-
utes 
Net economic value 111% 132% 104% 104% 
Social value 74% 76% 78% 75% 
Ecosystem stability 100% 100% 100% 100% 
Overall value 110% 77% 100% 93% 
-100%
-50%
0%
50%
100%
150%
200%
Maximize Net
Economic Value
Maximize Social Value Maximize Ecosystem
Stability
Maximize All
Attributes
% of Status Quo Values
Net Economic Value Social Value Ecosystem Stability Overall Value
Figure 3. Optimized fishing rates for each objective function. Va lues are relative to the 
Ecopath base fishing rates. 
Page 22, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
eral response of increasing vulnerabilities results 
in decreased productivity and less resilient to 
over-fishing; therefore from a fishing policy per-
spective, it is best to hedge by assuming higher 
vulnerabilities. Using lower vulnerabilities as-
sumes more of a donor-control system, therefore 
higher trophic level organism are more sensitive 
to changes that occur in the bottom of the food 
chain, which calls for extreme caution in harvest-
ing low to mid-trophic level species. 
 
Discussion 
 
In our analysis of alternative fisheries manage-
ment strategies for the Ge orgia Strait we have in-
corporated environmental , trophic interactions 
and anthropogenic effects that we believe best 
represent the history of the Strait of Georgia eco-
system. In our attempt to recreate the dynamics 
of the SoG ecosystem, we were able to generate a 
time series of primary pr oduction anomalies that 
greatly improve the fit to observed data. Although 
we provide no statistical measure of model fits, 
the environmental time series pattern generally 
agrees with other environ mental correlates that 
suggest a regime shift (Beamish et al. 1999). Fur-
thermore, fitting Ecosim to relative abundance 
data in the Strait of Georgi a, is one of the first ex-
amples of ‘ground-truthing’ Ecosim to real data. 
In the context of workshop objectives, our analy-
sis differs because we incorporate the effect of en-
vironmental variability, and thus our results do 
not examine before and after type scenarios. Here 
we evaluate the performance of each fishing pol-
icy using the objective function from the open and 
closed loop routines. 
 
Fishing policies that maximize social or economic 
values generally increase fishing rates on four of 
the six fisheries, including the salmon fisheries, 
despite having high ini-
tial fishing rates in the 
1950’s. The salmon fish-
ery is a special case, 
however, because of 
large inputs of hatchery 
fish starting in the 
1970’s. In searching for 
an optimal fishing pol-
icy, the search routine 
foresees the improve-
ments in salmon egg 
production (this is how 
we simulated the effects 
of hatcheries), and in-
creases fishing rates. The 
hatchery input has also 
affected juvenile survival 
rate for salmon. As the 
time series data in Figure 1 demonstrate, there 
has been an increase in juvenile mortality rates 
about the same time hatcheries came on line. In 
conjunction, primary production is thought to be 
declining around this time period (Beamish et al. 
1997, Beamish et al. 1999), ultimately leading to a 
reduced carrying capacity for juvenile salmon. It 
is clear in our analysis that both hatchery inputs 
and a reduction in primary productivity have had 
a significant impact on sa lmon populations in the 
SoG. In general, however, it is of no surprise that 
most of the fisheries defined here are to increase 
under the optimal policy. Because of relatively 
low base fishing rates defined in Ecopath and a 
downward trend in primary productivity, the op-
timal response should be to increase fishing pres-
sure and catch the fish before they die of starva-
tion. 
 
Ecosim predictions are highly sensitive to the set 
of vulnerability parameters, which measure the 
rate of exchange between behavioral states of 
vulnerable to invulnerab le. High vulnerabilities 
imply a ‘top-down’ control that often leads to 
predator-prey cycles, and these groups are very 
sensitive to over-fishing. As mentioned earlier, a 
conservative fishing policy will hedge by using 
vulnerabilities erred on the high side. At this 
time, Ecosim offers several methods for bounding 
vulnerability parameters, and fitting Ecosim 
models to real data looks promising. However, 
just as in single spec ies stock assessment pro-
grams, ‘probing’ experime nts (e.g., deliberate 
over-fishing) are required to provide adequate 
contrast in the data. Without such contrast, the 
ability to estimate vulnerability parameters is se-
verely confounded. 
 
I t  i s  c l e a r  f r o m  m a n y  f a i l u r e s  i n  s i n g l e - s p e c i e s  
stock assessment and management programs that 
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
Net Economic Value Social Value Ecosystem Stability Overall Value
Objective Function
Relative Function Values
V = 0.2 V = 0.4 V = 0.6
Figure 4. Sensitivity of objective function values  to the vulnerability parameters in 
Ecosim. The objective function values have been scaled for comparison. 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 23  
 
we can no longer forge ahead blindly, ignoring 
trophic interactions and environmental influence 
on ecosystem dynamics. In our analysis of the 
Strait of Georgia, it is evident that both salmon 
hatchery production and changes in primary pro-
duction have had a significant impact on salmon 
stocks. Seal culling programs were largely ineffec-
tive in salmon conservation, and have also threat-
ened other species that we place high values on 
(e.g. transient, i.e.marine mammal-eating, killer 
whales). In his keynote address at the 1996 Alaska 
Sea Grant Fisheries St ock Assessment Models 
Symposium, Keith Sainsbury called for a new 
paradigm in resource assessments (Sainsbury 
1998), specifically for methods that assimilate 
large and diverse sets of data. Ecopath with Eco-
sim is such a tool.  
 
References 
 
B e a m i s h ,  R .  J . ,  C .  M a h n k e n ,  a n d  C .  M .  N e v i l l e  1 9 9 7 .  
Hatchery and wild production of Pacific Salmon in 
relation to large-scale, natural shifts in the produc-
tivity of the marine environment. ICES Journal of 
Marine Sci. 54: 1200-1215. 
B e a m i s h ,  R .  J . ,  D .  J .  N o a k e s ,  G .  A .  M c F a r l a n e ,  L .  
Klyashtorin, V. V. Ivanov , and V. Kurashov 1999. 
The regime concept and natural trends in the pro-
duction of Pacific Salmon. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
56: 516-526. 
B e a m i s h ,  R .  J . ,  G .  A .  M c F a r l a n e ,  a n d  R .  E .  T h o m s o n  
1999. Recent declines in the recreational catch of 
coho salmon ( Oncorhynchus kisutch ) in the Strait 
of Georgia are related to climate. Can. J. Fish. 
Aquat. Sci. 56: 505-515. 
Cass, A. J., R. J. Beamish, et al. (1990). Lingcod (Opio-
don elongatus). Can Spec. Pub. Fish. Aquat. Sci: 40 
p. 
DFO 1999a. Fraser River Ch inook Salmon. DFO. Sci-
ence Stock Status Report D6-11 (1999). 
DFO 1999b. Coho Salmon in the Coastal Waters of the 
Georgia Basin. DFO Science Stock Status Report 
D6-07 (1999). 
Hay D. E., P. B. McCarter, and K. Daniel 1999. Pacific 
herring tagging from 1936-1992: A re-evaluation of 
homing based on addition al data. Canadian Stock 
Assessment Secretaria t Research Document 
99/176. 
Lichatowich, J. 1999. Salmon without Rivers. Island 
Press, Washington D.C., 317 pp. 
Martell, S. J. D. 1999. Re constructing Lingcod Biomass 
in Georgia Strait and the E ffect of Marine Reserves 
on Lingcod Populations in Howe Sound. M.Sc. The-
sis, University of British Columbia. 89p. 
Myers, R. A., K. G. Bowen, and N. J. Barrowman 1999. 
M a x i m u m  r e p r o d u c t i v e  r a t e  o f  f i s h  a t  l o w  p o p u l a -
tion sizes. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 2404-2419. 
Pauly D., Pitcher, T., Priekshot, D., and Hearne, J. 
(eds) Back to the Future: Reconstructing the Strait 
of Georgia Ecosystem. Fi sheries Centre Research 
Reports 6(5): 99 pp. 
Pauly, D., V. Christensen, J.  Dalsgaard, R. Froese and 
F. Torres, Jr. 1998. Fishing down marine food webs. 
Science 279: 860-863. 
Pauly, D., V. Christensen, R. Froese, and M. L. Palo-
mares 2000. Fishing Down Aquatic Food Webs. 
American Scientist, 88: 46-51. 
Sainsbury, K. 1998. Living marine resource assessment 
for the 21
st Century: What will be needed and how 
will it be provided? In Fisheries Stock Assessment 
Models, Ed. F. Funk, T. J. Quinn II, J. Heifetz, J. N. 
Ianelli, J. E. Powers, J. F. Schweigert, P. J. Sullivan, 
and C.I. Zhang, Alaska Sea Grant College Program 
Report No. AK-SK-98-01, University of Alaska 
Fairbanks. 
Schweigert, J. F., C. Fort, and R. Tanasichuk 1998. 
Stock assessments for British Columbia Herring in 
1997 and forcasts for potential catch in 1998. Can. 
Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 2217: 64 p. 
Stocker, M. 1993. Recent management of the B.C. her-
ring fishery, p. 267-293. In. L. S. Parsons and W. H. 
L e a r  ( E d s . )  P e r s p e c t i v e s  o n  C a n a d i a n  M a r i n e  R e -
source Management. Can. Bull. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
226. 
Wallace, S. S. 1998. Changes in Human Exploitation of 
Marine Resources in Britis h Columbia (Pre-Contact 
to Present Day). Pages 58-64 in: Pauly D., Pitcher, 
T., Priekshot, D., and Hearne J. (eds) Back to the 
Future: Reconstructing the Strait of Georgia Eco-
system. Fisheries Centre Research Reports 6(5):  99 
pp. 
Walters, C. J., V. Christensen, and D. Pauly 1997. Struc-
turing dynamic models of exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balance assessments. Reviews in 
Fish Biology and Fisheries. 7: 139-172. 
W a l t e r s ,  C .  J . ,  D .  P a u l y ,  V. Christensen, and J. F. 
Kitchell 2000. Representing density dependent 
consequences of life history strategies in aquatic 
ecosystems: Ecosim II. Ecosystems 3: 70-83. 
W a l t e r s ,  C .  J . ,  D .  P a u l y ,  V. Christensen, and J. F. 
Kitchell 2000. Representing density dependent 
consequences of life history strategies in aquatic 
ecosystems: Ecosim II. Ecosystems 3: 70-83
. 
 
 
Page 24, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
The Use of Ecosystem-based  
Modelling to Investigate  
Multi-species Management  
Strategies for Capture Fisheries in 
the Bali Strait, Indonesia
 
 
 
Eny Anggraini Buchary1, Jackie Alder2, 
Subhat Nurhakim3 and Tonny Wagey4 
1 Fisheries Centre, UBC 
2 Edith Cowan University, Western Australia 
3 Research Institute for Marine Fisheries,  
   Jakarta, Indonesia 
4 Dept. of Earth & Ocean Sciences, UBC 
 
Abstract 
 
An Ecopath model of the lemuru ( Sardinella lemuru ) 
fishery located in the Bali Straits (Indonesia) was con-
structed to test the usefulness of the model in testing a 
range of management strategies for this dominant fish-
ery using Ecosim simulations. Four management sce-
narios: maximizing the net economic benefits; maxi-
mizing ecosystem stability;  maximizing social (em-
ployment) values; and a compromise of the above three 
strategies were used with three different vulnerability 
values. The results from the model provided were plau-
sible within the information provided for the exploita-
tion levels recorded for the fishery. The policy advice 
for the four management strategies was to reduce the 
catch which coincides with the conclusions of recent 
single species investigations. The model proved to have 
a useful role in managing the lemuru fishery, the policy 
advice, however, could be improved substantially by in-
corporating the SOI (Southern Oscillation Index), im-
proving the information on prices and landings, and 
expanding the ecological and biological knowledge base 
for primary producers, non- commercial species as well 
as for marine mammals, invertebrates and seabirds. 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The Bali Strait is located between the islands of 
Java and Bali  (Figure 1) with the Bali Sea to the 
north and the Indian Ocean to the south. It is 
funnel shaped with the southern opening ap-
proximately 55 km wide and the northern open-
ing 2.5 km wide. The Strait is bounded on the 
west by a narrow shelf (adjacent to East Java 
province) and a wider shelf on the east (adjacent 
to Bali province). The Strait is deepest in the 
southern end. Depths range between 50 m in the 
north and 1,400 m in the south. Indian Ocean wa-
ter tends to dominate the water mass in the Bali 
Strait. During the sout heast monsoon upwelling 
occurs with the peak effect in July and August 
(FAO/NGCP 1999; Merta et al., 2000).  
 
The lemuru ( Sardinella lemuru ) fishery is the 
dominant fishery in the Strait. Other small pe-
lagic species such as sardine species ( Sardinella 
spp.), round scads ( Decapterus spp.), bonito 
(Sarda sp.), mackerel ( Rastrelliger spp.) and tu-
nas ( Auxis spp., Euthynnus affinis ) are either 
caught as by-catch or targeted. The dominant 
gear used is the purse seine, some fishers use 
Danish seine and there is a small line fishery for 
demersal fish. A new line fishery targeting hairtail 
(Trichiurus spp.) is developing in the Bali Strait. 
 
Commercial fishing in the Bali Strait is restricted 
to fishers based in Muncar (East Java) and Ke-
donganan (Bali). Fishing generally occurs in the 
northwest monsoon (September to January). The 
lack of a harbour in Kedonganan and rough seas 
from late November to March also prevents 
purse-seiners from operating during these times.  
 
Like most small pelagic fisheries, the Lemuru 
fishery is highly variable, which is reflected by its 
landing between 1995 and 1998 (Table 1). The 
stock assessment of the Lemuru fishery is con-
sidered to be highly variable due to the school-
ing behaviour of the fish, the impact of ENSO 
(El Niño and Southern Oscillation) and the 
upwelling that occurs in the southeast mon-
soon. Therefore, validity of the single species 
methods used in previous assessments of the 
Lemuru fishery, which indicated that the fish-
ery may be overfished, is questioned 
(FAO/NGCP 1999). Nevertheless, concern was 
raised over the current effort levels that may 
drive the fishery to extinction by overfishing 
and reduction of spawning biomass to very 
low levels should a more severe environmental 
condition occur in the Strait (Ghofar et al. , 
2000).  
 
A multi-species stock assessment of the fisher-
East Java 
Bali 
Lombo
k
Madura 
I n d i a n    O c e a n
B a l i    S e a 
J a v a    S e a 
Figure 1. Location of the study area (shaded area).
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 25  
 
ies in the Bali Strait is lacking. There is also lim-
ited ecosystem research on the Bali Strait. Previ-
ous research mainly focused on the Lemuru as a 
single-species fishery, with environmental vari-
ability given limited attention. Ghofar et al.  
(2000) recently fitted the SOI (Southern Oscilla-
tion Index) into the surplus production model of 
the Lemuru fishery in Bali Strait. Despite the 
good fit, they suggested the application of models 
such as E
COPATH, E COSIM and E COSPACE that 
could incorporate such environmental parame-
ters, to be used to assist in the management of 
this fishery.  
 
This report presents a preliminary multi-species 
fisheries model of the  Bali Strait ecosystem. 
Model construction was conducted using the lat-
est development of the E
COPATH with ECOSIM ver. 
4.0 Beta (July 19 th, 2000 release) computer pro-
gram, for the FAO/UBC Fisheries Centre Work-
shop on the Use of Ecosystem Models to Investi-
gate Multispecies Management Strategies for 
Capture Fisheries. Although environmental pa-
rameters such as the SOI could not be obtained 
prior to and during the wo rkshop, it is the inten-
tion of the authors to refine the model once such 
parameters are obtained. This report emphasizes 
the usefulness of E
COPATH with E COSIM software 
to explore multi-species management strategies 
within an ecosystem context. This report there-
fore focuses on the response of the ecosystem and 
the fisheries to various management strategies.  
The Bali Strait Ecosystem-based Model 
 
Using a GIS (Geographic Information System) 
method, the modelled area of the Bali Strait was 
estimated to be 3,125.98 km
2 (Figure 1). The 
model developed in this report is based on infor-
mation from the 1990s. 
 
Model components, in general, were allocated 
into functional groups based on their similarity in 
their size, growth, mortality rates and diet (Chris-
tensen and Pauly 1992). Important small pelagic 
fish species in the fisheries, notably Lemuru and 
Scads, were allocated individually, and the analy-
sis will focus on these fisheries. Other pelagic fish 
species were divided into 'other small pelagics' 
and 'medium pelagics'. The designation of 'small' 
is based on the average or maximum body length 
of less than 30 cm, while 'medium' is based on the 
average or maximum body length of between 30 
t o  5 0  c m .  I n  t h e  c a s e  o f  B a l i  S t r a i t ,  w h i c h  i s  
dominated by small pelagics, large fish species 
were not defined as a functional group. Little is 
known about the demersal fish in the Strait and 
they were allocated to a single group. 
 
Pelagic fish species were identified from the 
FAO/NGCP Report (1999). Demersal fish species 
were adopted from medium demersal fish group 
of the Java Sea (Buchary 1999). Invertebrate spe-
cies were identified based on the knowledge of 
one of the authors, Dr. Subhat Nurhakim (RIMF, 
July 16, 2000), and from comparing various ex-
isting upwelling models (Christensen and Pauly 
1993). Consequently, four functional groups were 
allocated, i.e., zooplankton, macrozoobenthos, 
benthic infauna, and cephalopods. Seabird spe-
cies were identified from Whitten et al.  (1996, 
Table 7.3, p.383). Whales are known to migrate 
from Indian Ocean to the Pacific Ocean through 
passages in Lesser Sunda Islands (IUCN 1991; 
Jefferson et al., 1993; Rice 1989). 
Table 2. Input and output (in brackets) parameters of the preliminary Ecopath model of the Bali Strait, Indonesia, in 
the 1990s.  Footnotes for this table are provided as Annex 1 at the end of this paper.  
No. Group TL B (t/km 2) P/B (year -1) Q/B (year -1) EE P/Q 
Imm. 
(t/km2/yr) 
Emm. 
(t/km2/yr) 
1 Phytoplankton 1.0 300.00 i 30.00 n - (0.16) - 0.00 0.00 
2 Zooplankton 2.0 (8.79) 38.00 o 180.00 x 0.50 aj (0.21) 0.00 0.00 
3 Macrozoobenthos 2.2 (2.69) 3.20 p 13.50 y 0.80 ak (0.24) 0.00 0.00 
4 Bent. Infauna 2.4 (0.09) 9.00 q 30.00 z 0.90 al (0.30) 0.00 0.00 
5 Cephalopods 3.0 (1.55) 4.71 r 16.00 aa 0.90 am (0.29) 0.00 0.00 
6 Other Sm. Pel. a 2.9 (1.59) (4.50) 18.00 ab 0.70 an 0.25 ar 0.00 0.00 
7 Scads b 3.1 3.29 j 3.50 s 11.88 ac (0.07) (0.30) 0.00 0.00 
8 Lemuru c 2.8 (9.12) 4.00 t 14.00 ad 0.95 ao (0.29) 0.00 0.00 
9 Med. Pelagics d 3.7 (1.84) (1.91) 9.56 ae 0.50 ap 0.20 as 0.00 0.00 
10 Demersal fish e 3.5 (0.026) (1.83) 9.14 af 0.80 aq 0.20 as 0.00 0.00 
11 Seabirds f 4.0 0.025 k 0.05 u 67.67 ag (0.09) (0.001) 0.00 0.00 
12 Res. Dolphins g 3.9 0.005 l 0.045 v 12.64 ah (0.53) (0.0036) 0.00 0.00 
13 Trans. Whales h 3.8 0.1507 l 0.0225 w 5.73 ai (0.20) (0.0039) 0.1507 at 0.151265 at 
14 Detritus 1.0 10.50 m - - (0.02) - - - 
Table 1. Annual landings (tons) of the Bali Strait fish-
eries, 1995-1998 (Source: DGF Annual Statistics, 1995 
to 1998). 
 
Species Landed 1995  1996 1997 1998 
Scads 2,796 1,051 460 1,422 
Mackerel 303 567 104 596 
Eastern Little 
Tuna 5,963 9,191 1,653 5,004 
Lemuru 9,335 9,770 45,994 76,796 
Page 26, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Therefore, for the model, marine mammals were 
split into resident dolphins and transient whales. 
Species composition of marine mammals for the 
model were obtained from Tomascik et al. (1997, 
Table 21.23, p.1157). 
 
Little is known about the invertebrate, seabirds 
and marine mammals groups in the Bali Strait.  
Therefore, input parameters were obtained 
mainly from other upwelling systems and other 
empirical studies, as note d in Table 2. Input pa-
rameters for fish groups were mainly sourced 
from the study area (Table 2). Landing data were 
obtained from DGF Statistics for the year of 1995 
to 1998 (Fauzi, pers. comm.), and input data were 
estimated as the average of these four years (Ta-
ble 1). Distribution of landing to fleet categories 
were based on one of the author’s knowledge of 
the fisheries, Dr. Subhat Nurhakim (RIFM,  July 
16, 2000).  
 
Allocations were made as follows: scads ( Decap-
terus spp.) is landed 10% by the handline fishery 
and 90% by Danish seine fishery, Lemuru ( Sardi-
nella lemuru) is landed 20% by Danish seine fish-
ery and 80% by purse seine fishery, other small 
pelagics (represented here by landing of Rastrel-
liger spp.) and medium pe lagics (represented 
here by landing of Euthynnus affinis ) are both 
landed 50% for each Danish seine and purse seine 
fisheries, respectively.  
 
Diet composition (Table 3) for each fish species 
was obtained from stomach content analysis col-
lated by FishBase 99 Online (Froese and Pauly 
2000) and the means were averaged to obtain 
group diet fractions. As for invertebrates, seabirds 
and marine mammals, diet compositions were 
Table 3. Diet composition matrix for all functional groups in the preliminary Bali Strait Ecopath model of the 1990s.
 
No Prey/Predator 2 a 3 a 4 a 5 b 6 c 7 c 8 c 9 c 10 c 11 d 12 e 13 e 
1 Phytoplankton 0.9 0.3 0.15  0.151 0.233 0.2      
2 Zooplankton  0.2 0.2 0.69 0.776 0.357 0.8 0.2 0.2   0.167 
3 Macrozoobenthos  0.01 0.15 0.19    0.075 0.3  0.1  
4 Benthic infauna    0.02 0.007    0.2    
5 Cephalopods    0.02 0.063   0.175 0.13 0.4 0.4 0.533 
6 Other small pelagics    0.02 0.003 0.01  0.2 0.05 0.2 0.2 0.077 
7 Scads          0.2 0.2 0.057 
8 Lemuru    0.01  0.4  0.35 0.051 0.2 0.2 0.167 
9 Medium Pelagics         0.048    
10 Demersal fish    0.001     0.02 0.01   
11 Seabirds         0.001    
12 Resident Dolphins         0.001    
13 Transient Whales         0.001    
14 Detritus 0.1 0.49 0.5 0.05         
 Sum 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00  1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 
a. Modified from Olivieri et al. (1993).                               b  Modified from Buchary (1999).  
c  From FishBase 99 Online (Froese and Pauly 2000). Averaged from each species member to obtain  
    proportional values for each functional group.           d Estimated from del Hoyo et al. (1992). 
e Modified from Jefferson et al. (1993) and Pauly et al. (1998). 
Table 4. Management goals and perf ormance indicators used for searching op timum fishing strategies for the Bali 
Strait fisheries (TL* = vulnerabilities adjusted for trophic level). 
 
Weights to performance indicators  
Management goal Net economic 
value 
Social (em-
ployment) 
Ecosystem 
stability Vulnerabilities 
M1: Maximize net economic value 1. 0 0.0001 0.0001 0.2; 0.5; 0.7; TL* 
M2: Maximize ecosystem stability 0. 0001 0.0001 1.0 0.2; 0.5; 0.7; TL* 
M3: Maximize social (employment) value 0.0001 1.0 0.0001 0.2; 0.5; 0.7; TL* 
M4: Big Compromise 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.2; 0.5; 0.7; TL* 
 
 
 
Table 5. Landings (t/km2, averaged values of 1995 to 1998 data) of the functional groups caught by three fleet types 
of the Bali Strait fisheries represented in the model. 
 
Functional Group Handlines Danish Seines Purse Seines Total 
Other small pelagics  0.063 0.063 0.126 
Scads 0.046 0.412  0.458 
Lemuru  2.43 9.718 12.148 
Medium Pelagics  0.872 0.872 1.744 
Sum 0.046 3.777 10.653 14.476 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 27  
 
obtained from existing studies as noted in Table 
3. Migration parameters were estimated for tran-
sient whales, assuming that they spend approx-
imately two months in the Strait during which 
they grow at the rate of their production. 
 
The resulting model comprised 14 functional 
groups (Table 2), which include one primary pro-
ducers group, four invertebrate groups, five fish 
groups, two marine mammals groups, one sea-
birds group, and one detritus group. 
 
Management Strategies Tested 
 
Four management strategies were used in the 
Workshop (Table 4) to se arch for fishing policy 
optimization (Christensen et al. , 2000). In each 
of the management strategies different vulner-
ability values were used, viz., 0.2, 0.5, 0.7. An ad-
ditional set of vulnerabilities adjusted for the tro-
phic level were used to see how sensitive the 
model is to strong fluctuations in trophic flow 
control.  
 
These four management 
strategies were also com-
pared with the 'Base' 
which essentially is the 
current situation where 
the simulation was run 
using no particular strat-
egy and that all fishing 
fleets catch fish using the 
current fishing rates. 
Fishing policy search 
simulations were run for 
20 years. Price and cost 
information were not en-
tered in the model, as the 
were not available. As 
noted in Table 1, catch 
data were obtained only 
for four pelagic fish func-
tional groups and landed 
by three fishing fleets (Table 5).  
 
Results and Discussion 
 
Impact of different management 
strategies on effort E/S ratio under 
different trophic control scenarios   
 
The first management scenario 
(Maximizing Net Economic Benefit) 
recommends a substantial decrease 
in effort for the purse seine fishery 
(Table 6). However, for the Danish 
seine and handline fisheries a sub-
stantial increase in effort is recom-
mended except at v = 0.7 for the 
Danish seine fishery where there is no change in 
effort (Table 6). The substantial increase in effort 
recommended by the virtual manager for han-
dline fishery, which targets Scads in this model, 
depleted Scad biomass after 20 years of simula-
tion (Figure 2). Under this strategy, the system 
was driven to a situation where trophic interac-
tions caused the Lemuru population to become 
unstable at v = 0.2 and v = 0.7. Due to the volatil-
ity of the Lemuru, piscivorous fish such as scads 
(who were also heavily fished by increased han-
dlines) and medium pelagic fish (who were 
caught by Danish seines) became very unstable 
and even extinct in the case of medium pelagics 
(except at v = 0.7).  
 
In the absence of the price of landed species and 
cost of fishing in the model, the recommendation 
suggested by the virtual manager was to increase 
relative fishing effort of gear that lands the high-
est yield. In this case that was the Danish seine 
fishery (except at v = 0.7), that now primarily 
catches other small pelagic fish. The interplay of 
Table 6. Effort E/S ratio resulting from all management strategies simu-
lated under different trophic control scenarios. 
 
Fishing fleets Vuln. 
factor 
Base M1 M2 M3 M4 
Purse Seine v = 0.2 1.52 0.05 0.28 0.02 0.06 
 v = 0.5 1.52 0.03 1.52 0.01 0.02 
 v = TL* 1.52 0.03 0.28 0.01 0.02 
 v = 0.7 1.73 1.73 0.89 0.01 0.02 
Danish Seine v = 0.2 1.11 20.11 1.58 19.17 18.73 
 v = 0.5 1.22 11.26 1.22 11.51 11.38 
 v = TL* 1.11 11.77 2.79 11.9 11.84 
 v = 0.7 0.69 0.69 1.44 8.24 7.94 
Handline v = 0.2 1.11 20.14 0.94 20.14 20.13 
 v = 0.5 1.11 20.09 1.11 20.09 20.09 
 v = TL* 1.11 20.14 0.92 20.14 20.14 
 v = 0.7 20.09 20.09 0.89 20.6 20.6 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Phyto
Zoop
MacrozooBe
nt. Inf.
Cepha
O. Sm.
Pel.
Scads Le
m
Med. Pel.Dem. Fi
sh
Seabird
s
Res. Dol.
Tr. W
ha
Detr.
Biomass E/S ratio
M1v2 M1v5
M1v7 M1vTL
Figure 2. Resulting changes in species biom ass under management strategy 1 
(maximizing net economic benefit), and under different trophic control scenarios. 
Page 28, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
trophic dynamics in the system caused other 
small pelagics' biomass to increase substantially 
after 20 years (Figure 2). An increased effort in 
the Danish seine fishery would increase the eco-
nomic development of the area since the fish 
caught by Danish seines usually fetch a higher 
price than the fish landed by purse seines (S. 
Nurhakim, pers. obs .). However, this is accom-
plished by the virtual closing of the purse seine 
fishery, and this could have significant social con-
sequences since the catch is processed at a local 
factory that is a source of local employment 
(FAO/NGCP 1999). Nevertheless, increasing the 
Danish seine fishery as recommended by the vir-
tual manager could risk the ecosystem since in-
creasing effort of Danish seines also impacts me-
dium pelagic fish that have a high trophic level, 
viz., TL = 3.7 (Table 2), and therefore, could re-
duce the stability of the ecosystem.  
 
In management scenario two, which aims to 
maximize ecosystem stability, there is a reduction 
or no change in the recommended effort for the 
purse seine and an increase or no change in effort 
for the Danish seine fishery. The rec-
ommended effort remains virtually 
unchanged for the handline fishery 
except at v = 0.7, where handline is 
substantially reduced (Table 6). These 
recommended efforts across the three 
fishing gears should provide a reason-
able degree of ecosystem stability to 
the system since there is a more bal-
anced distribution of biomass across 
the food web (Figure 3). The fishing 
policy suggested by the virtual man-
ager in management strategy 2 re-
duces fishing pressure in the system. 
Therefore, it generated characteristics 
at the end of the simulation that were 
similar to those at that at the begin-
ning of the simulation. It is 
worth noting that this is the 
only management strategy 
where v = 0.5 and v = 1/TL 
did not generate similar re-
sults for effort E/S ratio (Ta-
ble 6). 
 
Management strategy 3, 
which aims at maximizing 
social and employment 
value, surprisingly generated 
few differences in recom-
mended effort levels (Figure 
4) compared to management 
scenario one which aims at 
maximizing net economics 
value. This may be due to the 
absence of price and cost in-
put data in the model. Again a substantial de-
crease in effort was recommended for the purse 
seine fishery, and a substantial increase in the 
handline and Danish seine fisheries. This man-
agement strategy focuses on social optimization 
and since the Danish seine and handline fisheries 
employ more people per un it weight of landing, 
then it is logical that effort in these two fisheries 
increases. In addition, any increase in the Danish 
seine fishery effort needs to be compensated in 
the purse seine fishery since the two fisheries 
overlap in target species and ecosystem impacts. 
 
Despite allocating equal weightings to the per-
formance indicators in management strategy 4 
(the big compromise), the virtual manager gener-
ated effort recommendations very similar to those 
recommended for management strategy 3 
(maximizing social and employment value). Con-
sequently the impact of this strategy is similar to 
strategy 3 (Table 6 and Figure 5). 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
PhytoZoop
Macr
ozo
o
Bent
. Inf.
Cepha
O. Sm
.Pel
.
ScadsLem
Med.
 Pel.
Dem
. Fish
Seabi
rds
Res. D
ol.
Tr. WhaDetr.
Biomass E/S ratio
M2v2 M2v5
M2v7 M2vTL
Figure 3. Resulting changes in species biomass under management strategy 2 
(maximizing ecosystem stability), and under different trophic control scenarios. 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Ph
yto
Zoo
p
Ma
crozoo
Bent
. Inf.
Cep
ha
O. Sm
.Pel.Sc
ads Lem
Med. Pel.
De
m. Fish
Sea
birds
Res.
 Dol
.
Tr. Wh
a
Detr.
Biomass E/S ratio
M3v2 M3v5
M3v7 M3vTL
Figure 4. Resulting changes in specie s biomass under management 
strategy 3 (maximizing social [emplo yment] value), and under different 
trophic control scenarios.  
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 29  
 
 
Scores of Performance Indicators 
 
In all trophic control scenarios (except at v = 1/TL 
in the closed loop simulation) and under both 
closed loop and open loop search procedures, the 
virtual manager suggested M4 strategy (the ‘big 
compromise’) as the optimal fishing policy since it 
generated the highest overall values (Tables 7 and 
8).  
 
However, when the performance indicators are 
observed independently of each other - the trend 
varies according to trophic control scenarios. The 
overall values also indicate that a management 
strategy focusing on ecological optimization does 
not perform well against strategies optimizing for 
social or economic benefits. 
 
Across the trophic control scenarios and in both 
closed loop and open loop search procedures, 
highest scores in 'net economic values' were not 
obtained under M1 strategy (maximizing net eco-
nomic value) whatsoever. Similarly, the highest 
scores in 'ecosystem stability' were not necessarily 
obtained under the M2 strategy (maximizing eco-
system stability). However, the highest scores in 
'social (employment) value' were all achieved un-
der the M3 strategy (maximizing so-
cial/employment value). 
 
The vulnerability parameters had 
limited impact on the overall per-
formance values. However, when 
highest scores were taken into ac-
count by individual performance 
indicator, in bottom-up donor con-
trol and intermediate control 
situation, the virtual manager 
tended to favor the M4 strategy 
(‘the big compromise’), followed by 
M3 strategy (maximizing so-
cial/employment value). In top-
down control and TL-adjusted tro-
phic control, the M3 strategy 
(maximizing social/employment 
value) was favoured and followed 
by the M1 strategy (maximizing 
net economic value).  
 
Therefore, in Bali Strait, which is an upwelling 
ecosystem that may have a “wasp-waist” struc-
ture, a search for any management strategy 
should always consider the variability in trophic 
flow control to provide a more analytical insight 
into the system. 
 
Conclusions 
 
In summary, for the fisheries where exploitation 
rates are still low then there is scope for the vir-
tual manager to introduce management regimes 
and to focus on various sustainability aspects. 
However, in the purse seine (lemuru) fishery 
which is highly exploited and has highly variable 
stocks, the impact of potential management 
strategies reduced the catches, which is needed to 
improve ecological, social and economic sustain-
ability of the fishery.  
 
The analysis in this report is not meant to provide 
realistic fishing policy evaluation for the Bali 
Strait fisheries, but rather, as an exercise to ex-
plore and test the overall responses of the Bali 
Strait ecosystem model to various multi-species 
management strategies. A more realistic ap-
proach would be to include the SOI (Southern  
Table 8. Summary of scores for all performance indicators of open loop simulations under all management strategies 
and different trophic controls. 
v = 0.2 v = 0.5 v = TL* v = 0.7  
Performance 
Indicators M1 M2 M3 M4 M1 M2 M3 M4 M1 M2 M3 M4 M1 M2 M3 M4 
Net. Econ. 
Value 1246.3 512.07 1247.5 1244. 9 1444.7 513.16 1448.2 1446.8 14 94.0 679.81 1476.0 1496.0 1139.06 704.48 1340.99 1337.29 
Social.  
Value 1246.3 512.07 12104.  1244.9 1444.7 513.16 14044. 1446.8  1494.0 679.81 14530. 1495.4 1139.06 704.48 12961.12 1337.29 
Ecosystem 
Stability -57.8 -226.91 -118.09 -54.30 -106.97 -256.1 -1 32.6 -105.52 -113.93 -199.14 -134.54 -114.08 -73.32 -234.98 -139.28 -118.72 
Overall 
Value 2.17 -0.10 2.93 4.09 2.36 -0.11 3.39 4.59 2.43 -0.09 3.51 4.73 1.91 -0.10 3.13 4.16 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Phyt
o
Zoop
Macr
ozoo
Bent. 
Inf.
Ce
pha
O. Sm.Pel.Scads Le
m
Med
. Pel.
Dem. F
ish
Seab
irds
Res. Dol.Tr. Wha
Detr.
Biomass E/S ratio
M4v2 M4v5
M4v7 M4vTL
Figure 5. Resulting changes in specie s biomass under management 
strategy 4 (big compromise), and un der different trophic control scenar-
ios. 
Page 30, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Oscillation Index), temporal pattern of primary 
productivity, economic data, social indicators, 
better landing data and better biological and eco-
logical information of demersal fish, inverte-
brates, marine mammals and seabirds. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We would like to thank Dr A. Fauzi for providing us 
with the landing data of the Bali Strait fisheries and 
some biological data of the ecosystem, and Dr. R. Wat-
son for estimating the areal extent of the study area and 
for his help in producing Figure 1. Subhat Nurhakim 
takes this opportunity to thank FAO for extending the 
invitation and providing the funding to participate in 
the Workshop. 
 
References 
 
Buchary, E.A. 1999. Evaluati ng the Effect of the 1980 
Trawl Ban in the Java Sea, Indonesia: An Ecosys-
tem-based Approach. Depa rtment of Resource 
Management and Environmental Studies. The Uni-
versity of British Columbia. M.Sc. thesis. 134 p. 
 Christensen, V. and D. Pauly 1992. A guide to the 
ECOPATH II software system (version 2.1). 
ICLARM Software 6, 72 pp. 
Christensen, V. and D. Paul y 1993. Trophic models of 
aquatic ecosystems. ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26, 
390pp.  
Christensen, V., C.J. Walt ers and D. Pauly 2000. Eco-
path with Ecosim: A User's Guide. Univ. of British 
Columbia, Fisheries Centre, Vancouver, Canada 
and ICLARM, Penang, Malaysia. 125pp. 
del Hoyo, J., A. Elliot, J. Sa rgata and  N.J. Collar (eds) 
1992. Handbook of the Birds of the World. Vol 1 to 
Vol 5. International Council for Bird Preservation. 
Barcelona  Lynx Edicions. 
DGF (Directorate General of  Fisheries) 1995. Annual 
Statistics of the Fisheries Landing in Indonesia. 
Jakarta. 
DGF (Directorate General of  Fisheries) 1996. Annual 
Statistics of the Fisheries Landing in Indonesia. 
Jakarta. 
DGF (Directorate General of  Fisheries) 1997. Annual 
Statistics of the Fisheries Landing in Indonesia. 
Jakarta. 
DGF (Directorate General of Fisheries) 1998. Annual 
Statistics of the Fisheries Landing in Indonesia. 
Jakarta. 
FAO/NGCP 1999. FISHCODE Management: Report of 
a Workshop on the Fishery and Management of 
Bali Sardinella ( Sardinella lemuru ) in Bali Strait. 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United 
Nations, Rome. 30pp. GCP/INT/648/NOR Field 
Report F-3 (En). 
Froese, R., and D. Pauly 2000. Editors. FishBase. 
World Wide Web electronic publication. Available 
at: <http:/www.fishbase.org>, 19 September 2000. 
Ghofar, A., C.P. Mathews, I. G.S. Mertha and S. Salim 
2000. Incorporating the So uthern Oscillation  In-
dices to the Management Model of the Bali Strait 
Sardinella Fishery. pp. 43-52. In FAO/NGCP (ed.). 
FISHCODE Management: Papers Presented at the 
Workshop on the Fishery and Management of Bali 
Sardinella (Sardinella lemuru) in Bali Strait. Food 
and Agriculture Organization of the United Na-
tions. Rome. 76p. GCP/INT/648/NOR Field Re-
port F-3-Suppl. (En). 
I n n e s ,  S . ,  D . M .  L a v i g n e ,  W . M .  E a r l e  a n d  K . M .  K o v a c s  
1987. Feeding rates of seals and whales. J. Anim. 
Ecol. 56: 115-130. 
IUCN (International Union for Conservation of Nature) 
1991. Dolphins, Porpoises and Whales of the 
World. The IUCN Red Data  Book. Gland, Switzer-
land. 429 p. 
Jarre, A., P. Muck, and D. Pauly 1991. Two approaches 
for modelling fish stock in teractions in the Peru-
vian upwelling ecosystem. ICES Mar. Sci. Symp . 
193: 178-184. 
Jefferson, T.A., S. Leatherwood, and M.A. Webber 
1993. Marine mammals of the world. FAO Species 
Identification Guide. 320 pp. 
Koga, F. 1987. The occurrence properties, biomass and 
production of zooplankton in Osaka Bay, eastern 
Seto Inland Sea. Bulletin of the Seikai National 
Fisheries Research Instit ute (Bull. Seikai Reg. 
Fish. Res. Lab./Seisuiken Kenpo)  64: 47-66. (In 
Japanese, with English Abstract). 
Lalli, C.M., and T.R. Parsons 1993.  Biological oceanog-
raphy : an introduction. Oxford: Pergamon Press. 
301 pp. 
Merta, I.G.S. 1992. Dinamika Populasi Ikan Lemuru, 
Sardinella lemuru  Bleeker 1853 (Pisces: Clupei-
dae) di Perairan Selat Ba li dan Alternatif Pengel-
olaannya. [Population Dynamics of Lemuru, Sar-
dinella lemuru Bleeker 1853 (Pisces: Clupeidae) in 
Bali Strait Waters and its Management Alterna-
tives]. Ph.D. Dissertation. Graduate Study Pro-
gramme, Bogor Agricultural University, Bogor. 
201p. (In Indonesian). 
Merta, I.G.S., K. Widana, Yu nizal and R. Basuki 2000. 
Status of the Lemuru Fishery in Bali Strait: its De-
velopment and Prospects. pp. 1-42. In FAO/NGCP 
(ed.). FISHCODE Manage ment: Papers Presented 
Table 7. Summary of scores for all performance indicators of closed loop simulations under all management strategies 
and different trophic controls.
 
v = 0.2 v = 0.5 v = TL* v = 0.7  
Performance 
indicators M1 M2 M3 M4 M1 M2 M3 M4 M1 M2 M3 M4 M1 M2 M3 M4 
Net. Econ. 
Value 769.97 366.99 763.66 778.56 791.9 357 789. 92 801.48 792.12 457.21 1058.1 800.82 734.64 474.97 769.22 761.89 
Social  
Value 769.97 366.99 7276.17 778.56 791.9 357 74 57.6 801.48 792.12 457.21 10288. 800.82 734.64 474.97 7543.8 761.89 
Ecosystem 
Stability -45.32 -227.54 -99.69 -43.46 -89.52 -254 - 110.57 -86.86 -96.76 -200.9 -115.78 -96.99 -85.61 -240.99 -120.41 -100.37 
Overall 
Value 1.3 -0.10 1.76 2.52 1.18 -0.11 1.80 2.43 1. 15 -0.09 2.49 2.39 1.08 -0.11 1.82 2.25 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 31  
 
at the Workshop on the Fishery and Management 
of Bali Sardinella ( Sardinella lemuru) in Bali 
Strait. Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations. Rome. 76p. GCP/INT/648/NOR 
Field Report F-3-Suppl. (En). 
Nilsson, S.G. and I.N. Nil sson 1976. Number, food and 
consumption, and fish predation by birds in Lake 
Mockeln, Southern Sweden. Ornis. Scand. 7: 61-70. 
Olivieri, R.A., A. Cohen and F.P. Chavez 1993. An eco-
system model of Monterey Bay, California. p. 315-
322. In V. Christensen and D.  Pauly (eds.). Trophic 
models of aquatic ecosystems. ICLARM Conf. Proc. 
26. 
Pauly, D., A.W. Trites, E. Capuli and V. Christensen 
1998. Diet composition and trophic levels of ma-
rine mammals. ICES Journal of Marine Science  
55: 467-481.  
Pauly, D., M.L. Soriano-Bartz and M.L.D. Palomares 
1993. Improved construction, parameterization 
and interpretation of st eady-state ecosystem mod-
els. p. 1-13. In V. Christensen and D. Pauly (eds). 
Trophic models of aqua tic ecosystems. ICLARM 
Conf. Proc. 26. 
Pauly, D., V. Christensen and V.J. Sambilay 1990. 
Some features of fish food consumption estimates 
used by ecosystem modeller s. ICES CM 1990/G:17. 
8 p.  
Perrin, W.F. and J.W. Gilpatrick, Jr. 1994. Spinner 
Dolphin Stenella longirostris  (Gray, 1828). p. 99-
128. In S.H. Ridgway and S.R. Harrison (eds.). 
Handbook of Marine Mammals, vol. 5. The First 
Book of Dolphins. Academic Press, London. 
Reilly, S.B. and J. Barlow 1986. Rates of increase in 
Dolphin population size. Fishery Bulletin  84(3): 
527-533.  
Rice, D.W. 1989. Sperm Whales, Physeter macro-
cephalus Linnaeus, 1758. p. 177-233. In S.H. Ridg-
way and S.R. Harrison (eds.). Handbook of Marine 
Mammals, Vol. 4. River Do lphins and the Larger 
Toothed Whales. Academic Press, London . 
Tomascik, T., A.J. Mah, A. Nontji and M.K. Moosa 
1997. The Ecology of the Indonesian Seas: Part 
Two. Periplus Editions. The Ecology of Indonesia 
Series. Volume VIII. pp. 643-1388. 
Trites, A. and D. Pauly 1998. Estimates of mean body 
weights for marine mamma ls from measurements 
of maximum body lengths. Can. J. Zool . 76(5): 
886-896. 
Trites, A., V. Christensen and D. Pauly 1997. Competi-
tion between fisheries and marine mammals for 
prey and primary production in the Pacific Oceans. 
J. Northw. Atl. Fish. Sci. 22: 173-187. 
Whitten, T., R.E. Soeriaat madja and S.A. Arief 1996. 
The Ecology of Java and Bali. Periplus Editions. 
The Ecology of Indonesia Series . Volume II. 969 
pp. + photo plates. 
Widodo, J. 1995. Population Dynamics of Ikan Layang, 
Scads ( Decapterus spp.). Pages 125-136 i n M. 
Potier and S. Nurhakim (eds). Biology, Dynamics, 
Exploitation of the Small Pelagic Fishes in the Java 
Sea. Report of the BIODYNEX Seminar, Jakarta, 
March 1994. PELFISH Project, Jakarta. 281 pp. 
 
 
 
Annex: Footnotes to Table 2 
 
a Slengseng ( Scomber australis ), Sardines ( Sardi-
nella sirm and S. fimbriata), Mackerels (Rastrel-
liger spp.).  
b Decapterus macrosoma, D. akadsi, D. russelli, 
D. muroadsi, D. kurroides, D. lajang, D. ma-
ruadsi, and D. tabl. 
c Sardinella lemuru 
d Bonito ( Sarda orientalis ), Bullet Tuna ( Auxis 
thazard), Eastern Little Tuna ( Euthynnus af-
finis), and Hairtails ( Trichiurus lepturus and T. 
auriga). 
e Assumed to be composed  of medium demersal 
fish. 
f Fregata minor  (Greater Frigatebird), F. ariel  
(Lesser Frigate), Sula leucogaster   ( B r o w n  
Booby) and Phaeton lepturus  (White-tailed 
tropic bird). 
g Tursiops spp. (Bottlenose Dolphin), Orcaella 
brevirostris (Irrawady Dolphin), and Globi-
cephala macrorhyncus  (Short-finned Pilot-
whale). 
h Physeter catodon (Sperm Whale) and Balaenop-
tera acutorostrata (Minke Whale). 
i Guesstimated to be 300. This value was esti-
mated using a combinatio n of other upwelling 
systems' data, notably of Monterey Bay (Olivieri 
et al.  1993) and Peruvian  models (Jarre et al. , 
1991) and the phytoplankto n data from the Bali 
Strait (Ref. Source from Fauzi) and was analysed 
using conversion factor  of Lalli and Parsons 
(1993, p. 261).  
j Catch ratio between Scads and Lemuru was 
0.1284. The MSY-derived estimated biomass of 
Lemuru was 25.59 t/km2 (UNDIP 1992 cited in 
FAO/NGCP 1999). Hence the biomass of Scads 
was assumed to be 3.2858 t/km2.  
k From the biomass of Booby in Peru60 model 
(Jarre et al., 1991). 
l Estimated using the weight data from Trites & 
Pauly (1998), and by using population and area 
71 data from Trites et al. (1997). 
m Estimated using the empirical formula of Pauly et 
al. ( 1 9 9 3 )  w h e n  P P  =  3 0 0  g C / m 2 / y e a r  a n d  E  =  
50 m. 
n Guesstimated to be 30. Again a combination of 
guessing and analyzing what information we 
have on the system. 
o As zooplankton in Bali Strait is mainly comprised 
of Copepods (Ref. Source  from Fauzi), P/B for 
zooplankton (36.1/year) was adopted from the 
P/B of Copepods in Os aka Bay (Koga 1987). 
Howev er ,  it wa s then cha ng e d to 38 /year  t o im-
prove R/B to 70. 
p From the P/B of Macrobenthos in Monterey Bay 
(Olivieri et al., 1993). 
q From the P/B of Meiobenthos in Monterey Bay 
(Olivieri et al., 1993). 
r From the P/B of Micron ekton in Monterey Bay 
(Olivieri et al., 1993). 
s Modified from Z of Decapterus macrosoma  of 
eastern Java Sea (Widodo 1995). 
t Merta (1992) estimated th at M = 1.00/year and  
F = 3.38/year  for Lemuru; resulting a Z or P/B 
Page 32, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
of 4.38/year. This P/B is  decreased to 4.00/year 
to balance the model.  
u From the P/B of Booby in the Peruvian upwelling 
model. See "Peru50", "Peru60" and "Peru70" 
(Jarre et al., 1991). 
v Using the assumption of Reilly and Barlow 
(1986) that the P/B of marine mammals is esti-
mated to be half of the r
max (= rate of increase), 
the P/B of resident dolphins in the Bali Strait is 
0.045/year - using the r max of tropical Spinner 
Dolphin ( Stenella longirostris ) in Thailand 
which is 9% (Perrin and Gilpatrick 1994). 
w Assumed to be half of re sident dolphins' P/B, i.e., 
0.0225/year. 
x Copepods ( Calanus and Acarcia) dominates Bali 
Strait (Ref. Source from Fauzi). These two spe-
cies are mesozooplankton. Hence, its Q/B was 
adopted from the Q/B of mesozooplankton in 
Monterey Bay (140/year) - also an upwelling sys-
tem (Olivieri et al., 1993). Increased to 180/year 
to get higher R/B. 
y Adopted from the Q/B (10.00/year) of Macro-
benthos in Monterey Bay (Olivieri et al. , 1993). 
Increased to 13.5/year to get the R/B ratio to in-
crease between 7 to 8. 
z From the Q/B of Meiobenthos in Monterey Bay 
(Olivieri et al. 1993). 
aa From the Q/B of Micr onekton in Monterey Bay 
(Olivieri et al., 1993).  
ab Estimated based on the empirical formula of 
Pauly et al. (1990) using W ∞ data from FishBase 
99 Online (Froese and Pa uly 2000), resulting a 
Q/B of 14.06/year. Increased to 18.00/year to 
improve R/B. 
ac Averaged from the Q/Bs of 8 Scad species (see 
note b). Estimated based on the empirical for-
mula of Pauly et al. (1990) using W ∞ data from 
FishBase 99 Online (Froese and Pauly 2000).  
ad Estimated based on the empirical formula of 
Pauly et al.  (1990) using W ∞ data of S. lemuru  
from FishBase 99 Online (Froese and Pauly 
2000), resulting in a Q/ B of 11.86/year. In-
creased to 14.00/year to balance the model. 
ae Averaged from the Q/Bs of 5 medium pelagic fish 
species (see note d). Es timated based on the em-
pirical formula of Pauly et al.  (1990) using W ∞ 
data from FishBase 99 Online (Froese and Pauly 
2000). 
af From the Q/B of medium demersal fish in the 
Java Sea (Buchary 1999). 
ag Averaged from the Q/Bs of 4 seabird species (see 
note f). Estimated using the empirical formula of 
Nilsson and Nilsson (1976). 
ah Averaged from the Q/Bs of 3 resident dolphin 
species (see note g). Estimated using the empiri-
cal formula of Innes et al. (1987). 
ai Averaged from the Q/Bs of 2 transient whale spe-
cies (see note h). Estimated using the empirical 
formula of Innes et al. (1987). 
aj Assuming a medium mort ality, EE was pre-set to 
0.5. 
ak From the EE (0.9) of Macrobenthos in Monterey 
Bay (Olivieri et al. , 1993). Changed from 0.9 to 
0.8 to increase R/B. 
al From the EE (0.9) of Meiobenthos in Monterey 
Bay (Olivieri et al., 1993). 
am From the EE (0.9) of Micronekton in Monterey 
Bay (Olivieri et al., 1993). 
an Assuming a high mortality, EE was preset to 0.7. 
ao Assuming an over-exploitation condition, EE was 
preset to 0.95. 
ap Assuming a medium mort ality, EE was preset to 
0.5. 
aq Assuming a high mortality, EE was preset to 0.8. 
ar Given that P/Q ratio should range from 0.05 to 
0.3, with smaller and fa ster-growing organisms 
and fish having P/Q close to 0.3, the P/Q for this 
group was arbitrarily entered as 0.25. 
as Arbitrarily entered as 0.2. 
at Biomass of transient whales was estimated to be 
0.1507 t/km2 in the model (see note l). Assuming 
that they spend approximately two months in the 
Strait and grow at their production rate 
(0.0225/year), they would have their biomass in-
creased by 5.65 x 10-4 t in two months, resulting 
an emigration biomass of 0.151265 t/km2. 
 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 33  
 
The Eastern Bering Sea 
 
 
Kerim Aydin 
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences,  
UW, Seattle
 
Abstract 
 
Ecosim policy maximization routines were used to ex-
amine fishing policies for a mid-1980s model of the 
eastern Bering Sea shelf/slope ecosystem containing 38 
functional groups and includ ing catch and bycatch.  In 
addition to yield maximization, the simulations ex-
plored “ecological” maximization (using the 1/PB index 
discussed in the workshop as a criterion) and examined 
mechanisms for increasing  pinniped biomass through 
selective prey manipulation, especially with respect to 
the endangered Steller Sea Lion (Eumetopias jubatus). 
 
Maximizing to the 1/PB criterion resulted in recom-
mendations for complete ec osystem removal of higher 
trophic level fish species (specifically Pacific cod; 
Gadus macrocephalus ).  This removal reduced food 
competition for slower-lived marine mammals.  There 
is no evidence that such a strategy provides ecological 
benefits, especially in light of the unpredictability that 
such a drastic manipulation would entail. 
 
Manipulating pinniped food supply to increase their 
biomass showed that, without the removal of large fish 
predators such as a rrowtooth flounder ( Atheresthes 
stomias), pinniped gains would be modest if fishing 
policies were set at the scale of the entire shelf and not 
targeted to local pinniped foraging habitat.  Pinniped 
results were sensitive to the initial apportionment of 
their diet between juvenile walleye pollock ( Theragra 
chalcogramma) and ‘other’ pelagic forage species.
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
One fundamental set of questions that faces fish-
eries researchers coming to grips with ecosystem-
level management is: ecologically speaking, is 
there such a thing as a ‘good’ or ‘bad’ ecosystem?  
If so, can/should management efforts be directed 
to ‘improving’ an ecosystem in a meaningful way?  
Or do such efforts mere ly support ‘charismatic’ 
species without coming to grips with the ecologi-
cal characteristics of a system?  
 
The ability to model many marine ecosystems in 
the same modeling language afforded by Ecopath 
allows the comparison of system-level indices of 
ecosystem structure.  Indeed, many of the indices 
included in Ecopath are built around the ecosys-
tem maturity concept as outlined by Odum 
(1969).   
 
As a result of this workshop, it was suggested that 
an increase in system maturity might occur if 
fishing strategies were changed so as to maximize 
biomass, weighting the ‘goodness’ of a biomass 
increase by the inverse of P/B for a box.  In other 
words, a 10% increase in a slow-lived species 
would count for more than  a 10% increase in a 
fast-lived species.   
 
This scheme has an intuitive appeal as a first at-
tempt at ecological-based management.  The 
1/(P/B) weighting scheme (1) can be calculated 
quickly; (2) seems like an ‘objective’ criterion;  (3) 
its ‘objective’ criteria emphasize what we intui-
tively might consider to be  sensitive species in an 
ecosystem: long-lived and slow-growing animals. 
However, before such a scheme can be accepted, 
it must be challenged: does using P/B as a criteria 
for increasing species biomass represent an eco-
logical improvement in the system, or is it a fancy 
way of codifying our desire for charismatic 
megafauna?  To test this, the results of fishing op-
timizations of the Eastern Bering Sea Ecopath 
model were examined in terms of a few key pro-
duction and respiration indices of ecosystem ma-
turity.  
 
I t  s h o u l d  b e  n o t e d  t h a t  O d u m ’ s  i n d i c e s  m a y  n o t  
be the best ecological indicator of ecosystem 
health—especially in sy stems where a succession 
of ecosystem states may be part of the ‘natural 
order’ of the system.  However, Odum’s indices 
are lowered by most major anthropogenic distur-
bances, so changes in management policies which 
lead to increases in ecosystem maturity may be a 
good thing in the absence of other information or 
values systems.    
 
The Model 
 
The Ecopath model used for this set of simula-
tions was based on a model of the Eastern Bering 
Sea (EBS) presented in Trites et al.  (1999).  The 
model covers an ocean area of approximately 
500,000 sq. km, bordered by St. Lawrence Island 
on the north,  Alaska and the Aleutian Islands on 
the east and south, and the Bering Sea shelf break 
on the west.
   
 
The EBS is a system in which multiple large-scale 
changes are known to have taken place, including 
the near complete removal of baleen whales in the 
1950s, the collapse of Pacific herring ( Clupea 
pallasi) in the late 1960s, the rapid increase in 
walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) in the 
late 1970s, the collapse of crab fisheries during 
the same time period, and the decrease in pin-
nipeds, especially the currently endangered 
Steller sea lion (Eumetopias jubatus), throughout 
the 70s, 80s, and 90s.  It is not clear which of 
Page 34, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
these latter changes are due to climate and which 
to anthropogenic effects. 
 
It is hard to pick a relatively ‘stable’  time period 
in which to build a base Ecopath model.  Data for 
the current model is from the time period 1980-
85, immediately following years of extremely high 
pollock  recruitment in the modeled area.  The 
model used in the workshop simulations has been 
modified substantially from the model published 
in Trites et al.  (1999).  Specifically it includes 
more detailed catch and discard information for 
key fish species.   
 
The version of the model used for these simula-
tions is preliminary, and is suitable only as a 
“test” for the Ecopath techniques covered in this 
workshop.  At press time, projections made by 
this 1980s model by Ecosim do not fit known 
1990s biomass trends, and the model is missing 
key dynamics for important species, especially 
with regard to pollock and marine mammals, ju-
venile fish in diet composition, and the uncer-
tainty in pinniped diets.  Please contact K. Aydin 
for information on current EBS Ecopath models.  
 
The complete model contains 38 boxes, broken 
down into 10 lower trophic-level groups, (phyto-
plankton, zooplankton, detrital, infaunal and epi-
faunal groups), 2 generic forage species groups 
(forage fish and cephalopods), 4 large crustacean 
(crab and shrimp) groups, 15 “larger” fish groups 
(representing the main commercial and bycatch 
species), 6 marine mammal groups, and 1 bird 
group.
   
 
One group, pollock, was split into juvenile and 
adult groups: no other juvenile groups were in-
cluded in the model.  However, much of the diet 
data was integrated over the entire age structure 
of each fish species, resulting in many cross-
connections between fish species from mutual 
predation on juveniles.  Pollock themselves are 
highly cannibalistic: 7 0% of predation mortality 
on juvenile pollock is due to cannibalism by adult 
pollock in the model.  
 
Calculations of mortality rates indicate that, on 
the scale of the entire modeled area, the EBS ex-
perienced relatively low ex ploitation rates during 
the early 1980s, as seen by the ratio of fishing to 
natural mortality F/M, (Table 1).  An F/M of 1.0 
would indicate a species fished at the ‘traditional’ 
MSY for biomass dynamics models.  All of the 
species groups fished in the EBS had exploitation 
rates below this level. 
 
For the purposes of the model, the fished species 
were divided into eight groups for the assignment 
of ‘gears’ based partially on management and par-
tially on ecological criteria (Table 1). Bycatch was 
apportioned to various gear types based on a 
qualitative examination of bycatch data. 
 
Methods 
 
Simulations were run using the nonlinear search 
procedure for optimum fishing strategies in-
cluded with EwE in the September 2000 version 
of the model.  Thirty years was chosen as the 
simulation run time, and each of the eight “gears” 
was set to select a single fishing strategy during 
the entire simulation period. The nonlinear fish-
ing strategy routine offered four “value” compo-
nents for determining the ecosystem goal func-
tion: economic value, social value, mandated re-
building, and ecosystem structure. 
 
Within the economic and social components, all 
retained catch was taken to have the same eco-
nomic and jobs weighting (default), due to lack of 
data on commercial catch prices.  These scenarios 
are shown as ‘economic’ and ‘social’  in the re-
sults. 
 
Two distinct “mandated rebuilding” policies were 
modeled  (1)  doubling  the biomass of the 3 pin-
niped groups in the model, representing walrus, 
multiple seal species, an d Steller sea lions; and 
(2) doubling the biomass of the endangered 
Steller sea lions only.  These scenarios are shown 
as “pinnipeds” and Stellers” in the results. 
 
The ‘ecosystem structure’ component was 
weighted using the new default criteria of the 
‘goodness’ of a unit increase of biomass of a box 
Table 1.  Biomass (t/km^2), total catch (commercial 
catch + discards, t/km^2), and exploitation rate di-
vided by natural mortality rate (F/M2+M0) for fished 
or bycatch species in EBS mode l.  G# indicates each of 
eight distinct fishery “gear types” used in Ecosim simu-
lations. * species are bycatch, divided among the fish-
eries. 
 
Species group G# Bio. Catch F/M 
Adult pollock 1 27.45 2.08 0.18 
Pacific cod 2 2.42 0.15 0.18 
Pacific halibut  3 0.14 .0003 0.06 
Greenland turbot 4 0.96 .077 0.25 
Arrowtooth flounder 4 0.80 .021 0.07 
Small flatfish 5 9.18 .326 0.10 
Skates * 0.29 .019 0.19 
Sculpins * 0.56 .017 0.08 
Sablefish 6 0.11 .005 0.13 
Rockfish 6 0.09 .003 0.09 
Grenadiers * 0.20 .006 0.08 
Eelpouts * 0.64 .006 0.02 
Pacific herring 7 0.78 .055 0.08 
Cephalopods * 3.50 .0007 0.00 
King crab 8 0.60 .042 0.13 
Tanner crab 
(C. bairdi) 8 0.60 .019 0.03 
Tanner crab (C. opilio) 8 1.60 .049 0.03 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 35  
 
relative to others being proportional to 1/(P/B).  
Scenarios related to ecological structure are 
shown as ‘Ecol’ in the results.    
 
Each of the four criteria components was maxi-
mized for in turn by setting the relative weight of 
one criterion to 1.0 (NOTE: see Cochrane this 
volume)  a n d  a l l  o t h e r s  t o  0 .  S o m e  m i x e d  s t r a t e -
gies were also attempted as per the suggestion in 
the workshop. 
 
The scenarios were run under multiple combina-
tions of Ecosim parameters.  Foraging Time Ad-
justment (FtimeAdjust) was set between 0.0 and 
0.5 for all adult groups, and left at 0.5 for juvenile 
pollock, as suggested by Carl Walters.  Flow rate 
(top-down/bottom up forcing) was set either to 
0.3 for all groups, or scaled between 0.2 and 0.9 
for trophic levels between 2 and 6, with upper 
trophic levels being more sensitive to ‘top-down’ 
effects.   
 
To obtain each solution, the solver routine was 
run for 100-200 iterations, with this process re-
peated using different starting F-values, both 
random and selected.  This process was repeated 
until it was felt that all values to which the rou-
tines converged had been found. 
 
Results 
 
The results of most of the search results are 
shown for one set of parameters only: ‘scaled’ 
flow rates (0.2 for lowest trophic levels to 0.9 for 
highest trophic levels), with FtimeAdjust set to 
0.0 for all boxes except juvenile pollock.  This was 
considered, after workshop discussion, to repre-
sent the most ‘realisti c’ parameter range in the 
absence of additional info rmation.  With the ex-
ception of the ‘ecological’ set of criteria as de-
scribed below, adjustments to flow and Ftime pa-
rameters changed the final optimum fishing rates 
by 5-20%, but did not change the pattern of re-
sults (which fisheries went up and which fisheries 
went down). The results of the economic and so-
cial maximization are shown in Table 2.   
 
Since all species were modeled to have identical 
economic and social value per-unit biomass, the 
results are the same for both types of maximiza-
tion.  Fishing on all groups increased: on cod, 
small flatfish, and herring fisheries this increase 
was dramatic, removing the species from the sys-
tem.  Increases in fishing of pollock, halibut, 
flounder & turbot, sablefish & rockfish, and crab 
were more modest. 
 
On the other hand, the rebuilding of pinnipeds 
resulted from a reduction in several fisheries: pol-
lock, flounder & turbot, sablefish & rockfish, her-
ring and crab (‘pinniped’ scenario, Table 3).  This 
doubled the biomass of  walrus and bearded seals 
and other seals groups after 30 years, and led to a 
1% increase in Steller sea lions.  At the same time, 
cod and small flatfish fisheries were increased, 
eliminating these species. 
 
When only Steller sea lion rebuilding was man-
dated using the Trites et al. (1999) diet matrix for 
the species as in the original model, cod fishing 
was reduced and flounder & turbot fishing in-
creased. The ‘Steller1’ maximization increased 
Steller biomass by a relatively small 13%, walrus 
and bearded seals by 51% and other seals by 11% 
over 30 years. 
 
However, research on sea lion diets being sum-
marized by the U.S. National Marine Mammal 
Laboratory ( in prep .) shows that Steller sea lion 
diet in the EBS is composed mostly of pollock, 
cod, and cephalopods, and not mostly of the un-
fished ‘other pelagics’ as in the present version of 
Table 2.  Change in base fishing rate of eight “gear 
types” (base rate 1.0) found by nonlinear Solver algo-
rithm to maximize economic and social criteria for the 
EBS model. 
 
Gear Economic Social 
1. Pollock 1.3 1.6 
2. Cod 25.0 21.0 
3. Halibut 1.3 1.1 
4. Flounder & Turbot 1.6 1.3 
5. Small flatfish 25.0 28.0 
6. Sable & Rockfish 1.4 1.5 
7. Herring 22.0 21.0 
8. Crabs 3.3 3.5 
Table 3.   C h a n g e  i n  b a s e  f i s h i n g  r a t e  o f  e i g h t  “ g e a r  
types” (base rate 1.0) found by nonlinear solver algo-
rithm to maximize mandated rebuilding criteria for 
EBS model.  “Pinnipeds” refe rs to a mandated rebuild-
ing of 3 pinniped boxes representing multiple species, 
while ‘Steller’ refers to a mandated rebuilding of Steller 
sea lions only: ‘Steller1’ uses Trites et al.  (1999) diet 
compositions for Steller sea lions while ‘Steller2’ uses 
modified diets consisting of greater proportions o f 
commercial fish. 
 
    Gear  Pinnipe ds Steller1 Steller2 
1. Pollock 0.3 0.2 0.03 
2. Cod 23.4 0.5 0.03 
3. Halibut 1.1 1.1 1.0 
4. Flounder & Turbot 0.4 18.4 30.0 
5. Small flatfish 19.2 12.8 30.0 
6.  Sable & Rockfish 0.5 1.1 4.7 
7.  Herring 0.1 0.3 0.5 
8.  Crabs 0.5 0.9 0.5 
 
Pinniped biomass (year 30/year 0) under fishing 
strategies above (1.0=year 0 biomass) 
 
Walrus & Bearded Seals 1.50 1.51 1.55 
Seals 1.50 1.11 1.07 
Steller sea lions 1.01 1.13 1.73 
Page 36, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
the Trites et al. (1999) diet matrix. 
 
When the diet of Stellers was changed to reflect a 
greater proportion of pollock and cod, a second 
scenario developed (‘Steller2’ in Table 3).   
 
In this case, the almost complete elimination of 
fisheries for pollock and cod, along with the in-
crease in flatfish fisheries, led to a 73% increase in 
Steller biomass after 30 years.  Under this change 
of diet, Steller sea lion increases close to 70% un-
der the ‘all pinnipeds’ maximization as well. 
 
‘Ecological’ rebuilding, weighting increases in 
biomass proportional to 1/(P/B), converged to 
two solutions, depending on starting F-values and 
Ecosim parameters.  The first solution, Ecol1, 
showed a reduction in all fisheries except cod and 
flatfish: these latter two species were eliminated 
from the system (Table 4).  On the other hand, 
the second solution (Ecol2 in Table 4) came about 
through a reduction in all fisheries. 
 
The Ecol1 solution was found by the solver in 
‘sensitive’ ecosystems with high vulnerabilities to 
top-down predation and/or high FtimeAdjust 
rates. Ecol2 was found in “less sensitive” ecosys-
tems, with vulnerabilities of 0.3 for all species 
and FTimeAdjust rates set to 0.  Some ‘middle 
sensitive’ parameter values resulted in conver-
gence on both solutions depending on starting F-
values.  While both solutions might represent lo-
cal maxima, Ecol1 had a higher maximization 
function (= better fit) than Ecol2. 
 
Mixed-strategy results (not shown) showed a mix 
of the above results, falling towards the compo-
nents given the heaviest weightings.   
 
Discussion 
 
Cod and small flatfish were both keystone species 
in this model: their reduction as predators re-
leased a wide variety of biomass of other species 
into the system.  It is not surprising, then, that 
their elimination featured heavily in many of the 
scenarios in Tables 2-4.   
 
Cod, in particular, feed on the same trophic level 
as many marine mammals while having P/B rates 
similar to fish: their removal allows for the 
growth of many longer-lived species because of 
the the increase of their prey. Eliminating small 
flatfish in year 1 caused so many changes that the 
system was substantially ‘o ut of equilibrium’ in 
year 30 and even year 50. 
 
It is also not surprising that the recovery of pin-
nipeds arose through the reduction of the fisher-
ies on key prey species and the elimination of  key 
competitors (Table 3). In particular, if Steller sea 
lions depend more heavily on fished species than 
indicated in the Trites et al.  (1999) model, a re-
duction in pollock and cod fisheries might sub-
stantially increase their biomass.  More work on 
pinniped diet is required to resolve this ques-
tion—in particular, spatial models should be used 
to address fisheries’ effe cts on pinniped popula-
Table 4.   Change in base fishing rate of eight gear 
types (base rate 1.0) found by nonlinear solver algo-
rithm to maximize ecological criteria for EBS model.  
Two solutions were found by the solver: Ecol1 tended 
t o  b e  f o u n d  i n  ‘ m o r e  s e n sitive’ parameter configura-
tions. 
 
    Gear Ecol1 Ecol2 
1.  Pollock 0.1 0.3 
2.  Cod 19.4 0.7 
3.  Halibut 0.4 0.7 
4.  Flounder & Turbot 0.2 0.3 
5.  Small flatfish 19.3 0.8 
6.  Sable & Rockfish 0.2 0.4 
7.  Herring 0.2 0.5 
8.  Crabs 0.7 0.7 
Table 5.  Year 30/Year 0 biomass of species boxes in 
the EBS model: (1) after following ‘Ecological’ fishing 
strategy 1 for 30 years, and (2) after turning off fishing 
for 30 years (‘Fzero’).  Six plankton and detrital groups 
that changed by less than 1% are not shown. 
 
Species 1 ‘Ecological’ 2 ‘Fzero’ 
Baleen whales 1.06 1.00 
Toothed whales 1.20 1.01 
Sperm whales 1.00 1.02 
Walrus & Bearded seals 1.98 0.98 
Seals 2.43 0.97 
Steller sea lions 1.00 1.01 
Pisc. Birds 1.03 0.44 
Adult pollock age 2+ 1.07 0.91 
Juv. pollock age 0-1 1.03 0.92 
Pacific cod 0.00 1.55 
Pacific halibut 3.23 0.95 
Greenland turbot 2.90 2.02 
Arrowtooth flounder 1.30 1.12 
Small flatfish 0.00 1.27 
Skates 0.00 1.74 
Sculpins 0.76 0.78 
Sablefish 0.51 1.36 
Rockfish 1.66 1.65 
Grenadiers 0.86 1.04 
Eelpouts 2.71 0.24 
Pacific herring 1.30 1.23 
Salmon 1.03 1.04 
Jellyfish 2.72 0.84 
Other pelagic fish 0.97 1.01 
Cephalopods 1.01 1.02 
Tanner crab 
(C. bairdi) 3.48 0.39 
Tanner crab (C. opilio) 5.68 0.24 
King crab 1.14 1.16 
Shrimp 1.98 0.87 
Epifauna 0.70 1.12 
Infauna 0.91 1.04 
Benthic amphipods 1.10 0.96 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 37  
 
tions. 
 
It is extremely interesting that the “ecological” 
maximization strategy falls into two categories 
shown in Table 4: the reduction of all fishing 
(Ecol2) and the channeling of prey into upper 
marine mammal populations by the elimination 
of key fish predators, specifically cod and small 
flatfish (Ecol1).  Can one be said to be better than 
the other ecologically speaking, outside of the 
given goal function?  
 
To investigate this, a 30-year run, turning off all 
fishing in year 0 (‘Fzero’ scenario) was compared 
to the results of following the Ecol1 strategy in 
Table 4 for 30 years. Ecol2 is a less-extreme ver-
sion of the ‘turning off fishing’ strategy: all results 
for the Fzero strategy were true to a lesser extent 
for Ecol2.   
 
The biomass levels after 30 years (end/start) are 
shown in Table 5.  For Ecol1, the biomass of ma-
rine mammals (low P/B ratios) has increased, as 
have pollock, halibut, turbot, flounder, rockfish, 
eelpouts, jellyfish, and shrimp, herring, and 
crabs. At the same time, cod, small flatfish, and 
skates (cod bycatch) were eliminated and sculpins 
and sablefish reduced.   
 
On the other hand, with the complete elimination 
of all fishing, many species increased slightly and 
only eelpouts decreased dramatically.  The in-
crease was spread among many “mid-level” fish 
species including turbot, skates, rockfish, herring, 
small flatfish, and cod, while pollock and 
sculpins, among others, decreased. Marine 
mammals increased, but changed much less than 
under Ecol1 (Table 5). 
 
So which is the more mature ecosystem, accord-
ing to Odum’s criteria?  Table 6 shows primary 
production, total system biomass, and respiration 
for the base Ecopath, Ecol1 and Fzero scenarios.  
For more mature ecosystems, P/R and P/B 
should decrease (as it does for both Ecol1 and 
Fzero) while B/throughput (B/E) should increase 
(as it does for both Ecol1 and Fzero).  So, both 
Ecol1 and Fzero are more mature ecosystems 
than the initial Ecopath equilibrium, according to 
this selection of indices. 
 
However, the increases in maturity arising 
through shutting off fishing (Fzero) are greater 
t h a n  i n  E c o l 1 ,  f o r  P / B  a n d  B / E  i n d i c e s .   I n  t h i s  
case, the most mature ecosystem is not necessar-
ily the one with the most slow-lived marine 
mammals.  
 
It is worth noting that, in this model,  the increase 
of the cod fishery led to the elimination of skates 
through bycatch, which was followed by the in-
crease in marine mammals (Table 5).  If skates 
were not eliminated, they (or jellyfish, or any 
other ‘undesirable’ species) might easily replace 
cod in the Eastern Bering Sea instead of marine 
mammals, as evidenced by the changes which oc-
curred after cod collapsed on the east coast of 
North America. 
 
This result suggests the danger in choosing a 
measure of ecosystem stability (such as large 
numbers of P/B animals) without thorough inves-
tigation.  While the elimination of cod to increase 
marine mammal populations does add slightly to 
system maturity, it is only ‘better’ than turning off 
fishing in that it coincides with our intuitive, sub-
jective view of healthy ecosystems.   
 
All of the indices of community structure should 
be examined closely with regard to the Ecosim 
optimization routines—it would be interesting to 
b e  a b l e  t o  o p t i m i z e  d i r e c t l y  f o r  s o m e  o f  O d u m ’ s  
indices within the interface.  
 
From the point of view of ecosystem stability, the 
existence of two ‘troughs’ of increasing maturity—
one with cod and small flatfish eliminated from 
the system and one with a lower degree of fishing 
overall—suggests that this optimization routine, 
based on some type of ecosystem maximization, 
m a y  b e  u s e d  t o  l o o k  f o r  d i s c r e t e  s t a t e s  a r i s i n g  
from possible “regime shifts” or system flips, 
which may occur if a system jumps from one ma-
ture state to another follo wing a perturbation or 
environmental change.    
 
 
 
Table 6. Primary production (PP), total system bio-
mass (B), respiration (R) and three ecosystem indices: 
Production/Respiration (P/R), Production/ Biomass 
(P/B), and Biomass/Energy throughput (B/E), shown 
for: (1) EBS Ecopath base ca se; (2) Ecological maximi-
zation solution 1 at year 30 (Ecol1); (3) After 30 years 
with zero fishing (all gears t u r n e d  o f f  i n  y e a r  0 )  
(‘Fzero’). Percentages show changes in the indices from 
the Ecopath base case. 
 
 Ecopath Ecol1 Fzero 
PP 2000 1997 1987 
B 275 276 278 
R 1645 1648 1640 
P/R 1.216 1.212 
(-0.33%) 
1.212 
(-0.33%) 
P/B 7.27 7.24 
(-0.41%) 
7.15 
(-1.65%) 
B/E 0.0755 0.0757 
(+0.27%) 
0.0767 
(+1.59%) 
Page 38, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
 
References 
 
Odum, E.P. 1969. The strategy of ecosystem develop-
ment. Science 104: 262-270. 
Trites. A.W., Livingston, P.A., Vasconcellos, M.C., 
Mackinson, S., Springer, A. M., and Pauly, D. 1999. 
Ecosystem change and the decline of marine mam-
mals in the Eastern Bering Sea: testing the ecosys-
tem shift and commercial whaling hypotheses. 
Fisheries Centre Research Reports. 7 (1):  98 pp. 
 
 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 39  
 
A Preliminary North-East Atlantic 
Marine Ecosystem Model: the 
Faroe Islands and ICES Area Vb 
 
 
Dirk Zeller and Katia Freire 
Fisheries Centre, UBC 
 
Abstract 
 
This report documents the construction and input data 
of the first Ecopath with Ecosim model for the Faroe Is-
lands marine ecosystem in the northeast Atlantic (ICES 
area Vb), covering the year 1997. The model comprises 
19 functional groups, in cluding two marine mammal 
groups and seabirds. The fi sheries component consists 
of foreign fleets and national fleets, with an emphasis 
on demersal fisheries. Sust ainable fisheries are of fun-
damental importance to the Faroe economy and cul-
ture. This model forms the foundation for future Eco-
sim and Ecospace simulations of the effect of fishing on 
the marine ecosystem around the Faroe Islands. 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The Faroe Islands (human population ~46,000) 
are located in the North-East Atlantic between 
the British Isles and Iceland, and consist of a 
group of 18 islands covering 1,399 km
2.  While of-
ficially part of the Denmark, the Faroe Islands has 
held a special statussince 1948, having been 
granted local autonomy. The major industries are 
fishing, sheep farming and cloth manufacturing, 
with fishing being the major export industry, 
equaling 44.5% of GDP and over 95% of all ex-
ports (
http://encarta.msn.com). Commercial as well 
as subsistence fisheries pl ay a significant role in 
Faroese culture and society (Anon. 1999a). 
 
The waters surrounding the Faroe Islands are 
dominated by the North-Atlantic drift, which pro-
vides temperate waters throughout the year 
(Anon. 1999a). ICES Area Vb covers 190,200 km
2 
and is subdivided into Vb1 (169,800 km 2) which 
includes the Faroe Islands, Faroe plateau, Bill 
Baileys bank and areas of deep, pelagic waters, 
and Vb2 (20,400 km
2) which contains the Faroe 
bank. The fisheries in the Faroe area can be char-
acterized as multi-gear and multi-species (Anon. 
1 9 9 7 ) .   I n  1 9 9 4  t h e  F a r o e  I s l a n d s  i n t r o d u c e d  a n  
ITQ-based management system, which was never 
successful, resulting in substantial increases in 
discarding and misreporting. Therefore, by mid 
1996 a new management system based on indi-
vidual transferable effort quotas (within same-
gear categories only) and seasonally closed areas 
(spawning periods) was introduced (Anon. 1997, 
Anon. 1999b). Thus, the focus of the new man-
agement system has shifted from catch to effort 
(Anon. 1999a).  
 
Brief review of Faroe and 
ICES Area Vb fisheries 
 
Cod stocks ( Gadus morhua ) and other demersal 
species form the most significant component for 
the Faroese fishing industry (Anon. 1999a). Since 
the establishment of the Faroese EEZ in 1977, the 
demersal fishery by foreign nations has decreased 
(Anon. 1999b) while the local fishing fleet under-
went a period of over-investment in the 80s 
(Anon. 1999a). Cod stocks in Faroese waters were 
reported to have declined  substantially from the 
mid-80s to mid-90s, due to environmental effects 
and to overfishing (Anon. 1999a). Fishing mor-
talities for cod increased considerably in the 80s, 
but more recently have declined to close to pro-
posed levels (Anon. 1999b ). Fishing mortalities 
for saithe ( Pollachius virens ) increased consid-
erably during the last few decades, primarily due 
to the introduction of pair-trawlers, but since 
1995 have been decreasing steadily. Fishing mor-
talities on haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus) 
have been very low since the 80s, a result of very 
low stocks and poor recruitment. During the late 
90s, however, fishing mortalities increased due to 
two strong recruitment year classes (Anon. 
1999b). With respect to the demersal fisheries, 
the new effort management system aims for aver-
age fishing mortalities 0.45. This corresponds to 
an average annual catch of approximately 33% of 
the exploitable biomass (Anon. 1999b). 
 
Blue whiting ( Micromesistius poutassou ), Nor-
wegian spring spawning herring ( Clupea haren-
gus) and mackerel ( Scomber scombrus) form the 
main components of the pelagic fisheries (both 
foreign and Faroese fleets) in ICES Area Vb. Blue 
whiting are caught from the Barents Sea to the 
Strait of Gibraltar, and the stock is considered to 
have been relatively constant since the early 
1980s, though estimates of abundance are impre-
cise (Anon. 1997). The total 1997 landings of blue 
whiting in all ICES areas exceeded management 
advice by nearly 15% (Anon. 1998a). Average fish-
ing mortality has been estimated at 0.325, and a 
projected increase to 0.4 is beyond the suggested 
safe level (Anon.1998a). In Area Vb, blue whiting 
are caught primarily by Russia and Norway, with 
only ~4% of the 1997 catch taken by Faroese ves-
sels (ICES STATLANDT).   
 
In contrast, over 90% of the total herring catch in 
Area Vb was taken by Faroese vessels in 1997. 
Overall, the fisheries on the Norwegian spring 
spawning herring stock imposed a fishing mortal-
ity of 0.19 in 1997 (Anon. 1999c). Nearly 40% of 
Page 40, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
the mackerel catches in Area Vb during 1997 were 
taken by the local fleet. The other major nations 
catching mackerel in this area were Russia, Den-
mark, Estonia and the U.K. (ICES STATLANDT). 
Average fishing mortalities for the complete 
North-East Atlantic mackerel stock varied from a 
high of 0.25 in the mid 1980s to a low of 0.19 in 
1991, before increasing again to 0.25 in the mid 
90s (Anon. 2000). Mackerel  are considered to be 
outside of safe biological limits and ICES advises 
significant reductions in fishing mortalities 
(Anon. 1997).  
 
The deep-water fisheries catch consists of species 
such as Greenland halibut ( Reinhardtius hippo-
glossoides), redfish ( Sebastes spp.), silver smelt 
(Argentina spp.), ling (Molva molva) and others. 
The long life-span and associated low rate of in-
crease of many of these species means that 
catches can be sustained for a number of years as 
the stocks are ‘mined’ before suddenly collapsing 
(Anon. 1997). The deepwater fisheries in ICES 
Area Vb were separated into three components 
for the present modelling attempt: redfish, 
Greenland halibut and other deep water species. 
Total landings from ICES Vb for 1997 were over 
34,000 tonnes, of which the Faroese fleets took 
over 97% of the Greenland halibut and redfish 
catch, and 78% of the other deep water species.  
 
Ecosystem model 
 
An ecosystem model of the Faroese waters (based 
on ICES Area Vb) was constructed using the latest 
test version of Ecopath with Ecosim (4.0 beta, 
www.ecopath.org). The present model is a prelimi-
nary version, and much of the data used had to be 
obtained from indirect so urces and areas that are 
close to, but not identical to ICES Area Vb (i.e. 
non-Faroe area data). The authors, in collabora-
tion with scientists from the Faroe Islands, are in 
the process of updating the present model to in-
corporate more suitable, Fa roe-area specific data. 
The parameterized Ecopat h input data used are 
summarized in Table 1, and sources for the group 
specific information are summarized in Table 2. 
The emphasis of the subsequent simulations ini-
tiated during the FAO sponsored workshop at 
UBC were to explore the new open and closed 
loop fisheries policy search routines in Ecosim us-
ing three extreme scenarios (economic, social and 
ecosystem stability) and an initial attempt to 
simulate a potential compromise scenario.  
 
Fishing fleet information 
 
Landings for 1997 by specie s for all fleets in ICES 
Area Vb were obtained from the ICES 
STATLANDT database. No information on dis-
cards is currently incorporated into the model. All 
non-Faroese fleets (mainly Iceland, Norway, Rus-
sia, United Kingdom, Germany, France, Denmark 
and Estonia) were pooled into a single “Foreign” 
category (Table 3). The Faroese fleets were sepa-
rated by gear according to the ICES NWWG re-
port (Anon. 1999b) and the Faroe Fisheries Labo-
ratory report (Anon. 1 998e), with the following 
changes: 1) addition of a ‘Pelagic’ gear type ac-
counting for all Faroese catches of pelagic species, 
2) pooling of ‘Industrial’  and ‘Others’ gear type 
due to low catches.   
Table 1.  Ecopath parameters used to describe the preliminary 1997 ICES Area Vb (Faroe Islands) marine ecosystem 
with 20 functional groups. P/B and Q/B are the production/biomass and consumption/biomass ratios,  respectively. 
 
Group 
Biomass 
(t km-²) P/B (year-1)Q / B  ( y e a r-1)
Ecotrophic 
efficiency 
Catch 
(t km-2) Trophic level 
Vulnerability 
parameter 
Baleen whales 0.059 0.05  5.059 0.069 - 3.9 0.7 
Toothed mammals 0.034 0.05 12.266 0.981 - 4.6 0.9 
Seabirds 0.017 0.01 35 0.000 - 3.8 0.7 
Cod 0.57 0.653 3.1 0.638 0.20 4.1 0.8 
Haddock 0.723 0.346 3.8 0.660 0.09 3.6 0.7 
Saithe 0.611 0.443 3.3 0.739 0.12 4.1 0.8 
Redfish 2.133 0.35 4.5 0.552 0.04 3.7 0.7 
Greenland Halibut 0.109 0.446  3.5 0.950 0.03 3.6 0.7 
Other dem.sal fish 1.869 0. 45 3 0.950 0.03 3.7 0.7 
Other deep water 0.765 0.35 3.1 0.950 0.10 4.1 0.8 
Herring 1.903 0.296 4. 6 0.949 0.10 3.4 0.6 
Blue Whiting 3.557 0.355 9.06 0.950 0.57 3.6 0.7 
Mackerel 1.03 0.276 4. 4 0.950 0.06 3.7 0.7 
Other pelagics 9.641 0.58 5 4.5 0.947 0.02 3.2 0.6 
Benthos 9.259 3.0 10 0.950 0.02 2.5 0.4 
Nekton 4.647 0.6 3.5 0.950 - 3.6 0.7 
Large Zooplankton 16.193 7.763 40 0.950 - 2.6 0.5 
Small Zooplankton 11.526 40 140 0.950 - 2.1 0.3 
Phytoplankton 54.36 50 - 0.682 - 1.0 0.1 
Detritus - - - 0.027 - 1.0 0.1 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 41  
 
Table 2.  Sources of input parameters for the Faroe Islands Ecopath with Ecosim Model. Dash means parameters estimated by the  model.
 
GROUP B P/B Q/B EE Diet 
1. Baleen whales : Balaenoptera acutorostrata, B. borealis, B. physalus, Megaptera novaeangliae (www.wildlife.shetland.co.uk) 
Trites & Pauly, 1998 
Pauly et al. 1998 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
V.Christensen pers. com. 
Trites & Pauly, 1998 
Pauly et al. 1998 
____ Trites & Pauly, 1998 
Pauly et al. 1998 
2. Toothed mammals: seals (Halichoerus grypus, Phoca vitulina); dolphins (Lagenorhynchus  acutus, L. albirostris, Phocoeana phocoena, Grampus griseus); whales (Globicephala melas, Orcinus 
orca, Physeter catodon) (www.wildlife.shetland.co.uk) 
Trites & Pauly 1997, 1998 
Pauly et al. 1998 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
V.Christensen pers. com. 
Trites & Pauly 1997, 1998 
Pauly et al. 1998 
____ Trites & Pauly 1997, 1998 
Pauly et al. 1998 
3. Seabirds 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
Anon. 1998c, Anon. 1999e 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
Anon. 1998c, Anon. 1999e 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
Anon. 1998c, Anon. 1999e 
____ Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
 
4. Cod: Gadus morhua 
ICES single sp. VPA: 
Anon. 1998b, Anon. 1999b 
ICES single sp. VPA: 
Anon. 1998b, Anon. 1999b 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
 
____ Iceland, Mendy (1997): adjusted with data 
from (Du Buit 1989) 
5. Haddock:  Melanogrammus aeglefinus 
ICES single sp. VPA: 
Anon. 1998b, Anon. 1999b 
ICES single sp. VPA: 
Anon. 1998b, Anon. 1999b 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
 
____ Iceland, Mendy (1997): adjusted with data 
from (Du Buit 1989) 
6. Saithe: Pollachius virens 
ICES single sp. VPA: Anon. 1998b,  
Anon. 1999b 
ICES single sp. VPA: 
Anon. 1998b, Anon. 1999b 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
 
____ Iceland, Mendy (1997): adjusted with data 
from (Du Buit 1989) 
7. Redfish: Sebastes spp. 
 Iceland, Mendy (1997) Iceland, Mendy (1997) Iceland, Mendy (1997) ----- Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
8. Other deep water fishes: angler (Lophius piscatorius), black scabbardfish (Aphanopus carbo), silver smelt (Argentina spp.); tusk (Brosme brosme), greater forkbeard (Physcis blennoides), Roundnose grenadier (Cory-
phaenoides rupestris), roughhead grenadier (Macrourus berglax), megrim (Lepidorhombus whiffiagonis), orange roughy (Hoplostethus atlanticus), blue ling (Molva dypterygia), ling (M. molva) 
____ (V. Christensen pers.com.) (V. Christensen pers.com.) (V. Christensen pers.com.) (V .Christensen pers.com.), inc. cannib’ism 
Anon. 1998d, Bjelland  & Bergstad 1998 
9. Greenland Halibut: Reinhardtius hippoglossoides 
____  
ICES VPA: Anon. 1999b 
 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
 
V. Christensen pers.com. 
Iceland, Mendy (1997): adj. for herring & blue 
whiting (Michalsen & Nedreaas 1998). 
10. Other demersal fishes 
___ Iceland, Mendy (1997) Iceland, Mendy (1997) Iceland, Mendy (1997) Iceland, Mendy (1997) 
11. Herring: Clupea harengus 
____ ICES single sp. VPA for Areas V 
and XIV: adjusted to Area Vb 
(Holst et al. 1998, Anon. 1999c). 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) Iceland, Mendy (1997) Christensen (1995) 
V. Christensen pers.com. 
12. Blue whiting: Micromesistius poutassou 
____ ICES single sp.VPA: Anon. 1999c www.fishbase.com (V. Christen sen pers.com.) www.fishbase.com 
13. Mackerel: Scomber scombrus 
____ Single sp.VPA (western stock): 
Anon. 2000 
 
www.fishbase.com 
 
(V. Christensen pers.com.) 
North Sea (Christensen 1995) 
Western Atlantic (Studhome et al. 1999) 
16. Nekton: cephalopods 
------ Iceland, Mendy (1997) Iceland, Mendy (1997) Ic eland, Mendy (1997) V. Christensen pers.com. 
17. Large zooplankton: large amphipods, copepods (e.g., Calanus finmarchicus), euphausids (Thysanoessa spp.). 
Dry weight biomass for SW Iceland (Gislason & Ast-
thorson 1995); DW= 0.26*WW, Opitz (1996); adj. to 
ICES Area Vb 
 
____ 
 
(V.Christensen pers. com.) 
 
(V.Christensen pers. com.) 
 
(V.Christensen pers. com.) 
18. Small zooplankton 
------- (V. Christensen pers. com.) (V. Christensen pers. com.) (V. Christensen pers. com.) (V. Christensen pers. com.) 
19. Phytoplankton 
P from Longhurst et al. (1995); conv.  wet wt 
Pauly & Christensen (1995). 
Iceland, Mendy (1997) ____ ____ ____ 
Page 42, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
ICES catches were allocated to Faroese gear types 
according to the percentage distributions of land-
i n g s  d o c u m e n t e d  i n  A n o n .  ( 1 9 9 8 e ) .   F i s h  p r i c e s  
(market price) for each species/group was ob-
tained from Fish Information Service 
(www.fis.com). For Faroese landings, market 
prices from Faroese markets were used; for for-
eign fleets, market prices for Danish, Icelandic 
and Norwegian markets were averaged. All prices 
are reported in US$ kg
-1 based on June 2000. For 
non-single species groups, prices for group mem-
bers were averaged to derive average group mar-
ket prices. The assumed discount rate is 4%, and 
non-market values have not been considered. 
 
Costs (by gear type) are approximated from Anon. 
(1994) and expressed as a percentage of the total 
landed value. However, these costs are based on 
Canadian fisheries and location specific informa-
tion is required. 
 
Simulations 
 
Each Ecosim simulation was run for a 30-year pe-
riod, and repeated for 4 different vulnerability 
(flow control) settings (0.1, 0.4, 0.7, and vari-
able). Variable vulnerability  (vv) values were ob-
tained by linear interpolation based on the tro-
phic level for each group, with the highest trophic 
level group (toothed mammals 4.6) being set at 
v=0.9 and phytoplankton (trophic level=1.0) be-
ing set at v=0.1 (Table 1). For simplicity of report-
ing and comparison between scenarios within the 
framework of this report, we concentrated on re-
sults obtained under v=0.7 and variable vulner-
ability settings. Furthermore, higher vulnerabili-
ties imply lower resilien ce to overfishing (S. 
Martell pers. com.), hence assuming higher vul-
nerabilities applies the precautionary principle 
for policy decisions. 
The weighting for the policy search criteria for 
each extreme scenario were: economic optimiza-
tion weighted only for net economic value; eco-
system stability optimization weighted for maxi-
mizing mammal and seabird biomass and using 
the reciprocal of the P/B ratios as importance 
weights for each group; and social optimization  
weighted to maximize jobs/catch (approximated 
by maximizing landings). For the extreme social 
scenario, highest weighting was given to the open 
boat sector within the demersal fleet, followed by 
longliners, jigger, gillnet and others (Table 3). For 
each extreme scenario, the relevant value compo-
nent was set to value weight = 1 (e.g., economic), 
while the other two value components (e.g., eco-
system and social) approximated zero (0.0001).   
 
For the ‘compromise’ scenario, all three value 
components were equally weighted. Additionally, 
social weighing for each fleet (jobs/catch) was 
equal within the Faroese fleets, and twice the 
weight given to foreign fleet (Table 3). Further-
more, ecosystem stability weights were set equally 
for all groups (rather than heavily weighted to-
wards mammals and birds) with an ideal biomass 
twice Ecopath baseline. The variables we com-
pared among scenarios were changes in total 
catch, value and biomass over the 30 year simula-
tion period, and, if applicable, we considered 
changes in individual sp ecies/groups and fleet 
components. 
 
Economic value optimization (extreme) 
 
Under the conditions of purely maximizing net 
economic gain from the system, total value over 
the 30-year period could be increased by 156%, 
with a concurrent increase in total catch and total 
biomass of 38% and 11%, respectively (Table 4). 
This was to be achieved  through 6- and 2-fold in-
crease in fishing effort by the pelagic and single-
trawl fleets, while other gears were to be shut 
down (e.g. pair-trawl, gillnet) or to be increased 
by 20-50% (e.g. long-line, foreign; Table 5). 
Table 3.  Fishing fleets and weighing factors used for 
weighing social employment values in the Ecopath with 
Ecosim model. Breakdown of Faroese demersal fleet is 
based on ICES NWWG report (Anon. 1999b). 
 Scenarios 
 Extreme Compromise 
Fleet/gear type
Jobs 
/catch 
Jobs/ 
catch 
Foreign 1 1 
Open boat 10 2 
Longline max 100t 5 2 
Longline  > 100t 5 2 
Single  trawl max 400hp 1 2 
Single trawl 400-1000hp 1 2 
Single trawl > 1000hp 1 2 
Pair trawl max 1000hp 1 2 
Pair trawl > 1000hp 1 2 
Gillnet 5 2 
Jigger 5 2 
Others 5 2 
Pelagic 1 2 
Table 4. Percentage change in catch, value and bio-
mass for the three simulated extreme scenarios under 
vulnerability conditions for all groups of v = 0.7, and 
the single compromise scenario considered (variable 
vulnerability). For comparison, variable vulnerability 
results for each extreme scenario are listed in brackets. 
 
Scenario Catch 
(%) 
Value 
(%) 
Biomass 
(%) 
Economic  
extreme 
38 (3) 156 (39) 11 (1) 
Ecosystem stability 
extreme 
-23 (-42) 35 (-3) 10 (6) 
Social extreme 60 (8) 183 (85) 15 (1) 
Compromise 6 109 2 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 43  
 
However, under conditions of maximizing eco-
nomic value alone (with assumed vulnerability of 
v=0.7), the dynamics of the simulations appeared 
unstable. Several groups were being depleted se-
verely in biomass, including mackerel, herring, 
blue whiting (all by over 95%), Greenland halibut 
(~80%), other demersal fish (~70%), haddock 
(~40%), redfish and toothed mammals (~30%). 
Three groups (cod, saithe and other pelagics), 
however, showed a drastic increase in biomass 
(397%, 209%, 192%). Cod and other pelagics were 
driving the increase in total value (34%, 256%).  
 
Simulated changes in total catch, value and bio-
mass would be smaller under conditions of vari-
able vulnerabilities (bracketed values in Table 4). 
Overall, the simulations indicated a more stable 
system compared to assumed vulnerability of 0.7. 
Policy recommendations were similar to the 
above scenario, except th at the open boat fleet 
was to receive an 18-fold increase in effort, while 
the longline sector was to be essentially elimi-
nated (Table 5). Biomass of mackerel, Greenland 
halibut and blue whiting were decreased by ap-
proximately 80%, 70% and 60%, respectively, 
while saithe biomass was predicted to increase by 
~100%.  
 
Ecosystem stability optimization (extreme) 
 
Under the extreme ecosystem scenario (heavily 
weighted towards mammals and seabirds), 
toothed mammal, baleen whale and seabird bio-
mass were increased by 60%, 40% and 2%, re-
spectively, while total biomass only increased by 
10% (Table 4). Total value increased by 35% with 
a concurrent drop in total catches by 23%. The 
fishing policy recommendations were to increase 
both single- and pair-trawl gears by 150% and 
160%, respectively, while the foreign fleet sector 
was to be boosted by a factor of 4 (Table 5). Other 
gear types were to be maintained or reduced by 
approximately 50%. As a result, saithe and blue 
whiting were simulated to be commercially ex-
tinct (-100%), while cod and other deep water 
species biomass was expected to drop by 50%.   
 
Under assumed conditions of variable vulner-
abilities, total biomass would have increased by 
only 6%, while both catch and value would have 
been reduced (Table 4). However, biomass of 
toothed mammals, baleen whales and seabirds 
would have increased by  41%, 26% and 14%, re-
spectively. The overall reduction in total catch 
and value were clearly driven by a 100% biomass 
loss for blue whiting, cod and haddock, and a 95% 
reduction in mackerel biomass. Increases of 130% 
for herring and other pelagics, and 70% for 
Greenland halibut did not offset the fisheries per-
formance. Policy recommendations included a 7-
fold increase of the fore ign fleet effort, nearly 5-
fold increase in long-line and 3 fold increase in 
single-trawl activities, as well as a marginal re-
duction in pair-trawl and gillnet effort (Table 5). 
Clearly, such a ‘reduced’ system is, in reality, 
likely to be less stable at an ecosystem level, even 
given sole emphasis on whales and seabirds.  
 
Social value optimization (extreme) 
 
Under the scenario targeted at maximizing catch 
(max. social employment target), total catch was 
indeed increased by 60%, while total value was 
improved by 183% and total biomass by 15% (Ta-
ble 4). Severe depletion of several groups did, 
however, occur. The main pelagic species, mack-
erel, herring and blue wh iting were reduced by 
100%, while other demersal fishes and Greenland 
halibut were reduced by 85% and 50%, respec-
tively. Clearly, the increase in total biomass was 
due to 400% and 230% increases in cod and 
saithe biomass. The observed pattern was the re-
sult of a policy optimization resulting in 20-fold 
increases in the open boat and pelagic gear types, 
Table 5. Results of open loop fishing policy search routine in Ec osim. Values indicate relative change in fishing effort 
for each fleet/gear type in relation to Ecopath baseline. 
 
Scenario Baseline Economic Ecosystem Social C’promise 
Vulnerabilities  0.7 vv 0.7 vv 0.7 vv Vv 
Foreign 1.0 1.5 1.1 4.1 7.2 6.6 6.5 0.1 
Open boat 1.0 1.3 19 1.1 1.1 20.1 20 0.5 
Longline max 100t 1.0 1. 2 0.1 0.4 4.8 0.3 0.3 0.0 
Longline > 100t 1.0 1.2 0.1 0.4 4.8 0.3 0.3 0.0 
Singletrawl max 400hp 1.0 2. 1 2.8 2.5 2.7 0.0 0.0 20 
Singletrawl 400-1000hp 1.0 2. 1 2.8 2.5 2.7 0.0 0.0 20 
Singletrawl > 1000hp 1.0 2.1 2.8 2.5 2.7 0.0 0.0 20 
Pairtrawl max 1000hp 1.0 0. 0 0.0 2.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Pairtrawl > 1000hp 1.0 0.0 0.0 2.6 0.8 0.0 0.0 0.0 
Gillnet 1.0 0.1 0.1 0.5 0.7 1.1 21 0.2 
Jigger 1.0 0.1 0.1 1.2 1.6 0.1 0.1 0.1 
Others 1.0 0.6 0.7 0.6 1.2 0.9 0.9 1.5 
Pelagic 1.0 6.1 2.2 0.5 0.3 22.4 32 20 
Page 44, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
a 6-fold increase in foreign fleet effort, 
with a concurrent reduction or phasing out 
of most other gear types (Table 5). 
 
Compromise optimizations 
 
The overall results for the compromise 
scenario suggested a 109% increase in total 
value accompanied by a 6% increase in to-
tal catch (Table 4). This was achieved 
through boosting singletrawl and pelagic fleets by 
a factor of 20, while essentially removing most of 
the other gear types (Table 5). At a species (or 
g r o u p )  l e v e l ,  t h i s  s c e n a r i o  d o e s  a l s o  l e a d  t o  t h e  
depletion or severe redu ction in biomass of sev-
eral species. Blue whiting, other deep water and 
Greenland halibut groups are reduced by 90-
100%, while redfish, mackerel and herring bio-
mass are expected to drop by 40-50%.  
 
Thus, while the compromise scenario does man-
age to obtain increases in all three parameters 
(value, catch and biomass) at the total level, the 
results would not be acceptable from a multi-
species, multi-fleet perspective. Clearly, more ap-
propriate values, particularly for the social em-
ployment values, are required, before a better 
long-term balance between the three value com-
ponents (economic, social and ecosystem stabil-
ity) can be attempted.  
 
Simulation of optimal fishing policy incorporat-
ing uncertainties 
 
Using the closed loop policy simulation module in 
Ecosim, we evaluated the change in performance 
of each derived fishing policy under conditions of 
uncertainty in annual stock size estimation (20% 
coefficient of variation for biomass estimates) and 
annual catchability increases (max. increase of 
10% year
-1). The percentage values presented in 
Table 6 represent the performance of the closed 
loop simulations (10 runs each) relative to the 
baseline Ecosim fishing policy simulation under 
conditions of perfect knowledge ( sensu Martell et 
al. this volume). Thus, values larger than 100% 
indicate improved performance by the simulated 
management under uncertainty, and values less 
than 100% indicate poorer performance com-
pared to conditions of perfect knowledge.  For ex-
ample, under conditions of uncertainty, perform-
ance was always poorer for social values (between 
33% and 49% poorer, Table 6). Interestingly, 
these simulations suggested that the performance 
under conditions of uncertainty was 95% and 
171% better for net economic values within the 
ecosystem and social extreme scenarios, respec-
tively, while performance was 7% poorer when 
trying to maximize for economic return. Surpris-
ingly, under conditions of uncertainty no im-
provements in ecosystem stability values could be 
obtained for either scenario. At this stage in the 
development of the current Ecopath model we 
have little confidence in the present results (see 
conclusions below). Furthermore, we cannot ex-
plain why, under conditions of uncertainty, we 
observed such a dramatic increase in economic 
performance for the ecosys tem stability, social 
values and compromise scenarios.  
 
Conclusions 
 
The aim of this exercise was to test the new policy 
search routines in Ecosim using three extreme 
scenarios and a potential compromise setting. 
Given the preliminary nature of the underlying 
Ecopath model for ICES Area Vb and Faroe Is-
lands, none of the present outcomes should be 
considered practical or representative. In many of 
the simulated scenarios, the suggested optimal 
policies were extreme (e.g., increasing fishing 
power of one fleet by 20  fold, while completely 
removing other fleets), generally resulting in 
biomass responses by the ecosystem model that 
lead to severe depletion of many groups. This ap-
plied even to the attempted compromise scenario. 
Three conclusions can be drawn from these find-
ings. Firstly, our underlying Ecopath model might 
not yet be representative of the ecosystem as re-
lated to the established fishing patterns in ICES 
Area Vb. Secondly, considerable fine-tuning of 
the compromise policy scenario might be re-
quired, through more realistic application of so-
cial and ecosystem value scores. And thirdly, as 
the version of the Ecosim routine used during the 
workshop was a test version, it is likely that some 
computational problems might still have resided 
in the program. Updating and corrections of the 
routine is ongoing (V. Christensen pers. com.). 
  
Currently we are in the process of updating the 
Ecopath parameters to location specific values, 
including fisheries fleet data, employment values, 
as well as time series data.  Future steps should 
include using time series data as forcing functions 
to derive more realistic vulnerability values for 
the major groups, as well as being able to account 
for environmental changes, prior to re-examining 
realistic policy options for forward projections 
Table 6: Performance comparison of po licy implementation simu-
lation under conditions of uncertainty. Percentage values represent 
the fraction of the performance compared to the open loop polic y 
benchmark (i.e., without uncertainty, variable vulnerabilities only). 
 
Scenario 
Net econ. 
value (%) 
Social 
value (%)
Ecosystem 
stability(%) 
Economic extreme 93 65 100
Ecosystem stability extreme 195 67 100 
Social extreme 271 61 100 
‘Big Compromise’ 144 66 100 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 45  
 
(e.g., see Martell et al. this volume). Any potential 
policy scenarios will be attempted in collabora-
tion with scientists from the Faroe Islands, in or-
der to incorporate local considerations and 
knowledge. 
 
The society and economy of the Faroe Islands is 
highly dependent on fisheries as the major export 
earner. Thus, the Faroe society is highly vulner-
able to fluctuations in stocks and hence catch, 
making efficient management strategies a priority 
(Anon. 1999). This is pa rticularly relevant, as 
most commercial species are considered fully or 
over-exploited (Anon. 1997, 1999). This situation 
has been brought about largely by long-term 
overfishing in most areas of the north-east Atlan-
tic, although environmental factors may have 
played a significant role in a few stocks (Anon. 
1997). At the same time, this high dependence on 
what is essentially a mono-economy, should re-
sult in over-cautious management scenarios be-
ing increasingly proposed. We consider that, once 
location specific data and time series information 
have been incorporated into the present Ecopath 
with Ecosim model, more realistic management 
scenarios can be simulated and evaluated that 
might point to policies that can lead to increased 
landings and economic yields, with improved sta-
bility in catches and reduced risk of stock col-
lapse. 
 
References
 
 
Anon. 1994. Report on fishing vessel performance: Sco-
tia-Fundy fisheries - Maritime Region. Economic 
Analysis Division, DFO Canada. Economic and 
Commercial Analysis Report No. 152:38pp. 
Anon. 1997. Review of the state of world fishery re-
sources: marine fisheries.  FAO Fisheries Circular 
No. 920 FIRM/C920 (ISSN 0429-9329), Rome, 
FAO, 173 pp. 
Anon. 1998a. Report of the northern pelagic and blue 
whiting fisheries working group. ICES CM 
1998/ACFM:18. 
Anon. 1998b. Report of the north-western working 
group. ICES CM 1998/ACFM:19. 
Anon. 1998c. Report of the working group on seabird 
ecology. ICES CM 1998/C:5. 
Anon. 1998d. Report of th e study group on redfish 
stocks. ICES CM 1998/G:3. 
Anon. 1998e.  Fiskastovnar og umhvorvi 1998. Lagt til 
raettis: Fiskirannsoknarstovan. Faroe Islands Fish-
eries Laboratory. 
www.frs.fo/fiskif/fiskogum/index.htm. 
Anon. 1999a. Fishery Country Profile: Faroe Islands. 
FID/CP/FRO Rev. 3. Rome, FAO. 
www.fao.org/fi/fcp/faroeise.asp. 
Anon. 1999b. Report of the north-western working 
group. ICES CM 1999/ACFM:17. 
Anon. 1999c. Report of the northern pelagic and blue 
whiting fisheries working group. ICES CM 
1999/ACFM:18. 
Anon. 1999d. Report of the study group on the biology 
and assessment of deep-sea  fisheries resources. 
ICES CM 1999/ACFM:21. 
Anon. 1999e. Report of the working group on seabird 
ecology. ICES CM 1999/C:5. 
Anon. 2000. Report of the working group on the as-
sessment of mackerel, horse mackerel, sardine and 
anchovy. ICES CM 2000/ACFM:5. 
Bjelland, O. and Bergstad, O.A. 1998.  Trophic ecology 
of deepwater fishes associated with the continental 
slope of the eastern Norwegian Sea. ICES CM 
1998/O:51. 
Christensen, V. 1995. A model of trophic interactions in 
the North Sea in 1981, the Year of the Stomach. 
Dana 11(1):1-28. 
Du Buit, M.H. 1989. Quantitative analysis of the diet of 
cod (Gadus morhua) off the coast of Scotland, Ann. 
Inst. Ocean. Paris 65(2):147-158. 
Gislason, A. and Astthorson, O.S. 1995. Seasonal cycle 
of zooplankton southwest of Iceland. J. Plankton 
Res. 17(10):1959-1976. 
Holst, J.C., Arrhenius, F., Hammer, C., Hakansson, N., 
Jacobsen, A., Krysov, A., Melle, W. and 
Vilhjalmsson, H. 1998. Report on surveys of the dis-
tribution, abundance and migrations of the Norwe-
gian spring-spawning herring, other pelagic fish 
and the environment of the Norwegian Sea and ad-
jacent waters in late winter, spring and summer of 
1998. ICES CM 1998/D:3. 
Longhurst, A.R., Sathyendranath, S., Platt, T. and 
Caverhill, C.M. 1995. An estimate of global primary 
production in the ocean from satellite radiometer 
data. J. Plankton Res. 17: 1245-1271. 
Mendy, A. 1997. Trophic modeling as a tool to evaluate 
and manage Iceland’s multispecies fisheries. Report 
of the Marine Research Institute of Iceland. MS in 
prep.  
Michalsen, K; Nedreaas, KH  1998. Food and feeding of 
Greenland halibut (Reinhard tius hippoglossoides), 
Sarsia 83(5):401-407. 
Opitz, S. 1996. Trophic intera ctions in Caribbean reefs. 
ICLARM Tech. Rep. 43:341pp. 
Studhome, A., Packer, D., Berrien, P., Johnson, D., Zet-
lin, C. and Morse, W. 1999. Essential fish habitat 
source document: Atlantic mackerel, Scomber 
scombrus, life history and habitat characteristics. 
NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-NE-141, 35 
pp. 
Pauly, D., Trites, A.W., Capuli, E. and Christensen, V. 
1998. Diet composition and trophic levels of marine 
mammals. ICES J. mar. Sci. 55:467-481. 
Trites, A.W. and Pauly, D. 1998. Estimating mean body 
masses of marine mammals from maximum body 
lengths. Can. J. Zool. 76:886-896 
 
Page 46, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Policy Simulation of Fisheries in 
the Hong Kong Marine Ecosystem 
 
 
Wai-Lung Cheung1, Reg Watson2 and 
Tony Pitcher2 
1 Department of Ecology and Biodiversity,  
  University of Hong Kong 
2 Fisheries Centre, UBC 
 
Abstract 
 
Alternative fishery management policies under differ-
ent policy objectives for the 1990s Hong Kong waters 
ecosystem were explored using a newly developed 
simulation model named ‘pol icy simulator’ under the 
Ecopath with Ecosim software. Scenarios, which aim to 
maximize the economic output, the social output, the 
ecological output, and a compromise between the 
above three outputs were simulated under different 
vulnerability settings. Results suggested that policy 
simulations that aimed to maximize economic and so-
cial strategy were sensitive to vulnerability setting. Re-
sults from simulations aimed to maximize ecological 
stability and the compromise scenario are generally 
consistent between different vulnerabilities, and sug-
gested that fishing effort of  all fishing sectors and all 
except P4/8 fishing sectors, respectively, should be re-
duced. The study also demons trated that the economic 
and social outputs decrease when policy objective fo-
cuses increasingly on maximi zing ecological stability. 
The results are consistent with general observations of 
fisheries management. It is suggested that the “policy 
simulator” offers excellent insights into management 
trade-offs in an ecosystem context.  
 
 
 
Study Area 
 
H o n g  K o n g  i s  s i t u a t e d  a t  2 2  oN and 114.3 oE, in 
southeastern China on the eastern shores of the 
Pearl River estuary. It has a sub-tropical monsoon 
climate, with average winter (December to Febru-
ary) and summer (June to September) tempera-
tures of 15 and 27 
oC respectively. Annual average 
water temperature is about 23 oC .  W i n t e r  i s  d r y  
while summer is wet. Hong Kong territorial wa-
ters, here refered to as Hong Kong waters (Figure 
1), are influenced by the outflow of freshwater 
from the Pearl River in the west, and oceanic cur-
rents in the east (Morton and Morton, 1986). In 
the winter, the Kiroshio Current brings in high sa-
linity and high temperature water from the Pacific 
through Luzon Straits, wh ile the Taiwan current 
from the East China Sea brings in water with re-
duced salinity and temperature. In summer, the 
H a i n a n  C u r r e n t  w i t h  h i g h  s a l i n i t y  a n d  v a r i a b l e  
temperature water moves past Hong Kong to-
wards Taiwan. These seasonal conditions create a 
wide range of habitat types for the diverse marine 
flora and fauna. There are around 50 species of 
zooxanthellate corals (Morton, 1994) and more 
than 800 species of fishes, of which reef fishes  
constitute more than  300 (Ni and Kwok, 1999; 
Sadovy  and Cornish, 2000). 
 
These marine resources are exploited commer-
cially by capture fisheries. 
 
Brief overview of Hong Kong’s fisheries 
 
In Hong Kong, marine capture fisheries supply a 
great local marine fish demand. This high de-
mand is mainly created from the high consump-
tion rate of fisheries products in Hong Kong. It 
was estimated that 46 kg of fisheries products per 
c a p i t a  p e r  y e a r  w e r e  c o n s u m e d  ( A F D  1 9 9 6 ) ,  
which was seven times more than the consump-
tion rate of the residents of United States and 
second only to Japan (EVS, 1996).  
 
Dramatic expansion of the Hong Kong marine 
capture fisheries took place in the later half of the 
20
th century with rapid mechanization supported 
by the government. Additionally, modern trawlers 
were introduced in the 1960s to replace the tradi-
tional style trawlers (Stather, 1975). At the same 
time, other fishing technologies such as onboard 
refrigeration, ultra-sounder, and other navigation 
technology were being developed.  
 
Fishery resources in Hong Kong waters were 
mainly exploited by trawls (pair trawl, stern 
trawl, shrimp trawl and pelagic hang trawl), purse 
seines, and a mixture of gi llnets, fish traps, hook 
and line (hand-line and long-line) usually with 
small fishing boats. Multi-species stocks were ex-
ploited, with both reef and estuarine species well 
represented in the catches. Large predatory fishes
 
including groupers (Se rranidae), snapper (Lut-
Figure 1. Map of Hong Kong and the adjacent waters. 
The area within the broken line represents the territo-
rial waters of Hong Kong. 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 47 
janidae), yellow croakers and giant croakers 
(Sciaendiae) etc. were traditionally targeted by 
the fisheries, but are heavily depleted nowadays. 
 
Catches became dominated by the substantial 
amount of juveniles and small pelagic species, 
which support the demand for trash fish feed for 
local mariculture (Wilson, 1996; Sadovy, 1998). 
In general, fishery resources in Hong Kong waters 
are heavily over-exploited. A combination of 
growth, recruitment, ecological and economic 
overfishing occurs in Hong Kong waters (Cook et 
al., 1997; Pitcher et al., 1998; Sadovy, 1998; Wil-
son, 1997). 
 
Ecopath model of the Hong Kong  
waters ecosystem in the 1990s 
 
An Ecopath model for the Hong Kong marine 
ecosystem in 1990s (Table 1) was used in this 
study
1 (Buchary et al., in prep.). The model com-
prised 33 functional groups, which included over 
250 species from the Hong Kong survey database. 
Fish groups, prawns, cephalopods and benthic 
crustacean were divided into reef and non-reef 
associated (for details see Pitcher et al. , 1999). 
The fish groups were further divided into living 
bottom structure associated fish, small, medium, 
and large reef/non reef -associated fish and pe-
lagic fish, where the size category was determined 
by asymptotic length. Parameters, including 
growth, mortality, consumption and diet data, 
w e r e  a s s e m b l e d  f r o m  H o n g  K o n g  s u r v e y  d a t a  
(AFD, unpublished data), meta-analyses (e.g. 
Palomares and Pauly 1998; Pauly et al., 1993) and 
databases for the South China Sea such as 
Fishbase (Froese and Pauly, 1998). Parameter 
                                                        
1 T h i s  m o d e l  w i l l  b e  r e v i s e d  t o  i n c l u d e  t w o  m o r e  f u n c t i o n a l  
groups and parameters from the study area. 
Table 1. Summary of parameters input in the present-day Ho ng Kong marine ecosystem model. Italics and light 
shading show parameters that are estimated to balance the model. RA = reef associated; NRA = non-reef organisms. 
 
Group 
no. 
Functional 
groups 
Biomass 
(t/km-2) 
P/B 
/year 
Q/B 
/year EE P/Q 
1 Benthic producers 153 a 11.885b - 0.008 - 
2 Phytoplanktons 13 b 231b - 0.772 - 
3 Zooplanktons 14.7 b 32b 192b 0.081 0.167 
4 Jellyfish 0.032 5.011b 25.05b 0.95 0.200 
5 Living BottomSt. 17.184 0.1c 0.5c 0.95 0.200 
6 Small Zoobenthos 70.37 d 6.57e 27.4c 0.409 0.240 
7 Macrozoobenthos 3.1 f 3.2a 12.5c 0.993 0.256 
8 Bent. Crust. NR 0.304 5.65g 17.82h 0.95 0.317 
9 Bent. Crust. RA 1.217 1.85h 8.35h 0.95 0.222 
10 Pen. prawns NRA 0.72 g 5.98g 16.352I 0.953 0.366 
11 Peneid prawns RA 0.172 g 7.6g 41.537I 0.99 0.183 
12 Elasmobranch 0.022 0.5k 7.93k 0.95 0.063 
13 Cephalopods NRA 0.316 3.1b 11.97I 0.95 0.259 
14 Cephalopods RA 0.12 3.1b 11.97I 0.95 0.259 
15 LBS-assoc. fish Ad 0.23 1.2c 9.28c 0.95 0.129 
16 LBS-assoc. fish Ju 0.454 4.14g 10.47k 0.95 0.395 
17 Sm. Demersal RA 0.85 g 4.2g 10.47l 0.98 0.401 
18 Sm. Dem. NRA 0.935 g 4.2g 10.89l 0.998 0.386 
19 Med. Dem. RA 0.418 2.0m 8.63l 0.95 0.232 
20 Med. Dem. NRA 0.402 2.0m 8.63l 0.95 0.232 
21 Lg. Dem. RA Ad 0.578 0.9c 5.11l 0.95 0.176 
22 Lg. Dem. RA Ju 0.239 4.14k 10.47k 0.95 0.395 
23 Lg. Dem. NRA Ad. 0.481 0.9c 5.29l 0.95 0.170 
24 Lg. Dem. NRA Ju. 0.45 4.14n 10.89n 0.95 0.380 
25 Small Pelagics 1.824 2.845c 11.677l 0.95 0.310 
26 Medium Pelagics 0.3 c 2.5n 8.5l 0.891 0.294 
27 Large Pelagics Ad. 0.204 1.2c 5.9l 0.95 0.203 
28 Large Pelagics Ju. 0.302 3.35c 10.81l 0.95 0.310 
29 Marine Mammals 0.043 o 0.022p 22.732q 0 0.003 
30 Seabirds 0.015 r 0.04s 78.68t 0.285 0.001 
31 Sea turtles 0.001 m 0.15r 3.5r 0.114 0.043 
32 Coral 0.004 1.45u 4.48u 0.95 0.324 
33 Detritus 200 m - - 0.489 - 
a – Silvestre et al. (1993) for Brunei Darus-
salam, South China Sea 
b – Pauly and Christensen (1995) for the 
South China Sea  
c – Buchary (1999) for the Java Sea, Indo-
nesia 
d – Tsui et al. (1989), Daya Bay, South 
China Sea survey 
e – Greze and Kinne (1978) 
f – Adjusted for balancing the model 
g – Pitcher et al. (1998), earlier Hong Kong 
model 
h – Arreguin-Sanchez et al. (1993), north-
ern continental shelf of Yucatan, Gulf of 
Mexico.  
i – Alino et al (1993) Bolinao coral reef, 
Philippines model 
j – Browder (1993) Gulf of Mexico conti-
nental shelf model 
k – Assumed to be the same as small 
demersal reef-associated fish 
l – Pauly’s empirical equation (Pauly et al., 
1990) 
m – Arbitrarily set 
n - Assumed to be the same as small 
demersal non reef-associated fish 
o - Trites et al., (1997) 
p - Reilly and Barlow (1986) 
q – Using formular from Trites and Heise 
(1996), i.e., R = 0.1*W^0.8; and using the 
weight information from Pauly et al. (1995) 
and Trites and Pauly (1998) 
r – Polovina (1984), French Frigate Shoals 
model  
s – Jarre-Teichmann and Pauly (1993),  
Peruvian upwelling model 
t – Local species were identified using in-
formation collected by Melville (1984). The 
Q/B was estimated using weight data col-
lated in Hoyo et al. (1992), using formula 
by Nilsson and Nilsson (1976) 
u – Dalsgaard (1999), Enewetak Atoll 
model, Micronesia 
v – Opitz (1996) Caribbean coral reefs. 
Page 48, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
values for functional groups were obtained from 
the weighted average of biomass of the species. 
The living bottom structure fish, large reef fish, 
non-reef fish and large pela gic fish were split into 
juveniles and adults (Walters et al., 1997).  
 
Seven sectors of the Hong Kong fishery were 
modelled: stern, hang, pair and shrimp trawlers, 
purse seiners, and two small-scale artisanal sec-
tors ‘P4/7’ vessels and miscellaneous, which em-
ployed a mix of nets, traps and hook gear. Catch 
composition and landing value of each sector 
w e r e  o b t a i n e d  f r o m  t h e  H o n g  K o n g  s u r v e y  d a t a -
bases, while the cost profile was obtained from 
AFCD (pers. comm.).  
 
The vulnerability parameter, which is an input to 
control bottom-up or top-down trophic control of 
the ecosystem, was difficult to estimate, especially 
without time series biomass 
data for the functional 
groups. A consensus from 
the meeting was that vulner-
ability factors calculated as 
linearly proportional to the 
trophic level of the func-
tional groups were realistic. 
Vulnerability factors in this 
study were calculated using 
this method (Table 3).  
 
Methodology 
 
Alternative fishery manage-
ment policies under different 
policy objectives/strategies 
were explored using a newly 
developed routine named the 
‘policy optimisation inter-
face’ in the EwE software. 
Our Ecopath model of the 
1990s Hong Kong waters 
ecosystem was used as the 
base model for the policy 
simulation. Four strategies 
that aimed at maximizing 
one or more management 
objectives were investigated. 
These included: (1) economic 
strategy; (2) ecological strat-
egy; (3) social strategy; and 
(4) ‘the big compromise’. The 
details of the parameters setting of each 
s t r a t e g y  w e r e  s h o w n  i n  T a b l e  2 .  I n  t h e  
model, the ‘policy simulator’ will search 
for a policy, which maximizes the total 
objective function i.e. the weighted sum 
of the objectives of the economic, social 
and ecological components according to 
the value weight specified ( but see Coch-
rane, this volume ). For the social setting, since 
exact socio-economic data for the Hong Kong 
fisheries were not available, it was assumed that 
the smaller-scale fisheries, i.e. the P4/7 and mis-
cellaneous types of fisheries, employed more peo-
ple per catch. Therefore, the jobs/catch of P4/7 
boats was arbitrarily set to 5 while the less cost-
effective miscellaneous boats was set to be 2. The 
others remained as 1 job/catch. 
 
For the ecological setting, it was aimed to maxi-
mize the biomasses of the large predatory species 
i.e. elasmobranch, LBS-assoc. fish adult, large 
demersal reef/non-reef a ssociated fish adult, 
large pelagics (which are high-valued), and the 
charismatic groups i.e. marine mammals, turtles, 
seabirds and coral (their abundance is considered 
desirable in general by the Hong Kong public). 
Table 3. Ecological settings for the policy optimisation interface. 
  Importance Vulnerability 
Biomass group B ideal/ 
B base General 1/ (P/B) TL gradient 
Benthic Producers 1 0 0.084 0.2 
Phytoplanktons 1 0 0.004 0.2 
Zooplanktons 1 0 0.031 0.22 
Jellyfish 1 0 0.2 0.43 
Living Bottom Structure (LBS) 1 0 10 0.241 
Small Zoobenthos 1 0 0.152 0.241 
Macrozoobenthos 1 0 0.313 0.283 
Benthic Crustacean NRA 1 0 0.177 0.304 
Bent. Crustacean RA 1 0 0.541 0.43 
Penaeid prawns NRA 1 0 0.167 0.367 
Penaeid prawns RA 1 0 0.132 0.325 
Elasmobranch 5 1 2 0.619 
Cephalopods NRA 1 0 0.323 0.556 
Cephalopods RA 1 0 0.323 0.556 
LBS-assoc. fish Ad. 10 1 0.833 0.556 
LBS-assoc. fish Juv. 1 0 0.242 0.409 
Small Demersal fish RA 1 0 0.238 0.43 
Small Demersal fish NRA 1 0 0.238 0.451 
Medium Demersal fish RA 1 0 0.5 0.514 
Medium Demersal fish NRA 1 0 0.5 0.535 
Large Demersal fish RA. Ad. 10 1 1.111 0.577 
Large Demersal fish RA. Juv. 1 0 0.242 0.409 
Large Demersal fish NRA. Ad. 10 1 1.111 0.577 
Large Demersal fish NRA. Juv. 1 0 0.242 0.451 
Small Pelagic fish 1 0 0.299 0.451 
Medium Pelagic fish 1 0 0.4 0.577 
Large Pelagic fish Ad. 10 1 0.833 0.661 
Large Pelagic fish Juv. 1 0 0.299 0.472 
Marine Mammals 2 1 22.222 0.703 
Seabirds 2 1 25 0.64 
Turtles 2 1 6.667 0.241 
Corals 5 1 0.69 0.2 
Table 2. Value weight settings for the four management strategies.
 
 Value weight 
Value com-
ponent 
Economic 
strategy 
Ecological 
strategy 
Social 
strategy 
‘Big com-
promise’ 
Economic 1 0 0 1 
Social 0 0 1 1 
Ecological 0 1 0 1 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 49 
Therefore, these groups were given higher values 
of B ideal/B base ratio and their importance was 
set as 1, while the others were set as 0. The B 
ideal/B base ratio was defined as the ratio of the 
user’s desired biomass to the biomass of that par-
ticular functional group in the Ecopath base 
model. The ecological objective function was cal-
culated from the B ideal/B base ratio, which was 
weighted according to the importance set.  
 
However, the relative ec ological importance of 
particular functional groups in the model was 
highly subjective to the user. Therefore, the sug-
gestion was made during the workshop that simu-
lations should also be carried out under an im-
portance setting which was equal to the reciprocal 
of the production/biomass ratio (P/B) in the base 
Ecopath model. It was generally a consensus at 
the workshop that low growth-rate, long-lived 
groups (low P/B ratio) are more vulnerable to ex-
ploitation. Therefore the use of the reciprocal of 
P/B as the importance setting provided an objec-
tive way to value ecological importance in the 
ecosystem during policy optimization. This ap-
proach was adopted in our study. 
 
Simulations of a 30-year period were used to 
search for optimum fishing effort of the 
seven different fishery sectors under dif-
ferent management. The resulting eco-
nomical, social, and ecological objective 
functions, and fishing efforts were re-
corded. Simulations were repeated for 
different starting fish ing effort i.e. (1) 
Ecopath base F’s; (2) current F’s; and (3) 
random F’s, to ensure that a global opti-
mum was obtained (F’s are the fishing ef-
forts of the seven fishery sectors). In addi-
tion, the trophic level of fishery catch 
(TLC) which resulted from the suggested 
fishing effort in each strategy was calcu-
lated using: 
 
TLC  = [1/(C
t)] * Σ ( Ci*  TLi),  
 
Where,  ΣCi = C t, C t is the total catch, 
while Ci is the catch by species i. 
 
Sensitivity test 
 
Sensitivity of the policy simulations to different 
vulnerability settings was tested by repeating 
simulations under the four strategies with vulner-
abilities of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, and a gradient of vulner-
abilities ranging from 0.2 to 0.7 which were di-
rectly proportional to th e trophic level of each 
functional group (Table 3). 
 
Moreover, sensitivity of the relative effect of the 
ecological stability on the economical and social 
performance was tested by running policy simula-
tions under the settings in Table 4. 
 
Results 
 
Economic strategy 
 
Results from the policy simulation that aimed to 
maximize economic bene fit from vulnerability 
settings of 0.4 and 0.6 generally suggest that fish-
ing effort exerted by stern trawler (ST) should be 
increased by 0.5 to 1 times the Ecopath base 
value, while the other fishing sectors should be 
reduced or increased slightly (Figure 2). 
 
However, for a vulnerability setting of 0.2, the re-
sult suggested effort increases in purse seine (PS) 
and small outboard engine boat (P4/7), with ef-
fort decreased for stern trawlers and other fishing 
sectors. The results from vulnerabilities  propor-
tional to the trophic level of the functional groups 
is similar to the results from vulnerability settings 
of 0.4 and 0.6, except that it suggested a more 
than two-fold increase in the ‘miscellaneous’ sec-
tor. 
 
Table 4. The value weight settings for sensitivity test 
between different weight value in the ecological stabil-
ity component. For the the ‘big compromise’ and the 
‘economical versus ecologic al’ strategies, simulations 
were run with ecological stabilities listed. 
 
                Value weight 
Value com-
ponent 
The ‘big 
compromise’ 
Economical versus  
Ecological 
Economic 1 1 
Social 1 0 
Ecological 1, 2, 3, 4 0.1, 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12 
Misc
PT PS
ST
P4/7 HTSHT
-200%
-100%
0%
100%
200%
300%
Change from Ecopath Base F's
0.2
0.4
0.6
TL
Figure 2 .  Suggested change of fishin g effort for different fishing 
sectors in the economic strategy simulation. 
Page 50, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Social strategy 
 
The policy simulation that aimed to maximize so-
cial strategy suggested in creases in fishing effort 
of pair trawl, purse seine, hang trawl and P4/7 
sectors to maximize social benefits (jobs/catch) 
(Figure 3). However the suggested results were 
sensitive to the vulnerability setting. 
 
Ecological stability strategy 
 
Results from the policy simulator sug-
gested more than 50% decrease in ef-
fort for all fishing sectors to maximize 
ecological stability (as defined in the B 
ideal/B base and importance settings). 
These are consistent between simu-
lated results from different vulnerabil-
ity settings (figure 4). 
 
The ‘big compromise’
 
 
Results from policy simulator that 
aimed to maximize all the objective 
functions (economical, social and eco-
logical) over all the vulnerability set-
ting (0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and proportional to 
trophic level) generally suggested that 
the P4/7 fishing boats should be in-
creased by 0.5 to 2-fold, while the oth-
ers should be decreased slightly. 
Results from simulations of this 
strategy were generally consistent 
between different vulnerabilities 
except that it suggested shrimp 
trawl effort should increase more 
than 2-fold at a vulnerability of 
0.2, while the others decrease in 
effort. Moreover, the amount of 
suggested effort increase in the 
P4/7 sector was greater at a 
higher vulnerability setting.  
 
When the vulnerability was set to 
be proportional to the trophic 
level of the functional group, and 
the reciprocal of the P/B ratio was 
used as ecological importance set-
ting, the simulation results sug-
gested higher increase in the P4/7 
effort, and a general effort in-
crease in other fishing sectors 
(Figure 5).  
 
The economical, social, and eco-
logical objective functions (per-
formance) of the four strategies 
are summarized in Table 5. 
 
Moreover, simulation with vary-
ing ecological value weight setting in different 
strategies showed that the economic and social 
performances correlated negatively with the in-
creasing ecological stability setting (Figure 6). It 
was also found that the economic, social and eco-
logical performance responded strongly with 
changing ecological stability setting when the eco-
logical setting was increased from 0 to 2. When 
Table 5. Performance of the economical, social, and ecological objective 
functions for the four strategies. 
 
Strategy Strategy  Economic  Social Ecological Overall 
Economic 1 2574.6 15550.5 -10458.3 0.23 
Ecological 2 487.2 1257.3 -7672.6 -1.46 
Social 3 -25250.7 57572.6 -12935.2 3.47 
‘Big Compromise’ 4 1781.7 25020.2 -9966.7 -0.09 
-1000%
0%
1000%
2000%
3000%
4000%
5000%
6000%
7000%
8000%
ST SHT PT PS P4/7 Misc HT
Change in fishing effort
0.2
0.4
0.6
TL
Figure 3. Suggested change of fishing effort  for different fishing sectors in 
the social strategy simulation. 
PS
ST
PT
P4/7
Mis c
HT
SHT
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Change from Ecopath base F's
0.2
0.4
0.6
TL
1/ (P/B)
Figure 4.  Suggested change of fishing effort for di fferent fishing 
sectors in the ecological strategy simulation 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 51 
the ecological setting was increased to more than 
two, changes of the three performances were 
much weaker. 
 
Trophic level of catch 
 
The mean trophic level of catch calculated from 
the four strategies (with vulnerability setting pro-
portional to trophic level of the functional 
group) showed that strategy maximizing eco-
logical stability resulted in the highest mean 
trophic level while the strategy maximizing so-
cial benefits resulted in the lowest. Also, TLC 
lower than the base Ecopath value resulted 
from the economic strategy. The “big compro-
mise” strategy produced an intermediate TLC 
among all strategies (Table 6). 
 
Discussion 
 
Our results were con-
sistent with general 
observations of fish-
eries management. 
Simulation with ob-
jective policy that 
maximizes economic 
performance favours 
rapid turnover lower 
trophic level species, 
while a higher tro-
phic level of fishery 
catch is achieved 
when ecological goals 
favour larger preda-
tors. Moreover, in-
crease priority to 
maximize ecological sta-
bility resulted in de-
creasing economic bene-
fits. When the policy 
that maximizes jobs was 
prioritized, fisheries sec-
tors that use more la-
bour, typically small-
scale mixed inshore 
fisheries were favoured. 
This is in parallel with 
the syndrome of Mal-
thusian overfishing ob-
served in developing 
countries (Pauly, 1997).  
 
The optimization proc-
ess for each manage-
ment objective function 
involves restarting using 
different parameter val-
ues until no future im-
provement can be achieved. This proved to be 
m u c h  m o r e  d i f f i c u l t  w h e n  h i g h e r  v a l u e s  o f  v u l -
nerability were assumed (>0.5), this likely results 
from a more complex response surface with many 
local optima. Automation of this process will as-
sist users. Other optimization processes that can 
find the global optima could be employed.  
Table 6.   Mean trophic level of catch resulting from 
the suggested fishing effort fr om simulation of the four 
strategies. 
 
Strategy 
Trophic level of  
fishery catch 
Base Ecopath model value  3.16 
Economic only 3.14 
Social only 2.45 
Ecological only 3.40 
The ‘big compromise’ 3.21 
PS
SHT
HTMisc
P4/7
PT
ST
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Change from Ecopath base F's
0.2
0.4
0.6
TL
1/ (P/B)
Figure 5. Suggested change of fishing effort for different fishing sectors for the ‘ big
compromise’ strategy at different vulnerability factor settings: 0.2, 0.4, 0.6,
proportional to the trophic level (TL), and to the reciprocal of the
production/biomass (P/B) ratio. 
     
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
-11,000 -10,000 -9,000 -8,000 -7,000
Ecological performance
Economic performance
0
5,000
10,000
15,000
20,000
25,000
30,000
Social performance
Econ
Social
Linear (Social)
Linear (Econ)
Figure 6. Plot of economic and social performa nce against ecological performance. The 
R-squares of the fitted line in the economic and social performance are 0.96 and 0.86 re-
spectively. 
Page 52, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Moreover, we noted instability of the ecosystem 
at higher values of vulnerability. Since the model 
employed in this study was preliminary, we be-
lieve that more stable ec osystem might result fine 
tuning  the input parameters.  
 
During this workshop, there were numerous revi-
sions to the software. For consistency we used the 
version available at the end of the workshop (19 th 
July 2000 version). The impact of later versions 
on our findings is unknown, however, from the 
changes seen to interim results during the work-
shop, we believe that they may be generally ro-
bust. 
 
It was the consensus at the workshop that this 
approach shows real promise, and will gain credi-
bility once the method is stable and well tested. It 
offers excellent insights into management trade-
offs in an ecosystem context.
 
 
References 
 
Agriculture and Fisheries Department 1996. Annual 
Report. Hong Kong Government. 
A l i n o ,  P .  M . ,  L .  T .  M c M a n u s ,  J .  W .  M c M a n u s ,  C .  L .  
N a n o l a ,  M .  D .  F o r t e s ,  G .  C .  T r o n o ,  a n d  G .  S .  J a -
cinto 1993. Initial parameter estimations of a 
coral reef flat ecosystem in Bolinao, Pangsinan, 
Northwestern Philippines. in V. Christensen and 
D. Pauly, editors. Trophic models of aquatic 
ecosystems. ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26. 
Arreguin-Sanchez, F., J. C. Seijo and E. Valero-Pacheco 
1993. An application of ECOPATH II to the north 
continental shelf ecosystem of Yucatan, Mexico. 
in V. Christensen and D. Pauly (eds) Trophic 
models of aquatic ecosystems. ICLARM Conf. 
Proc. 26. 
Browder, J. A. 1993. A pilot model of the Gulf of Mex-
ico continental shelf. in V. Christensen and D. 
Pauly, editors. Trophic models of aquatic ecosys-
tems. ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26. 
Buchary, E. A. 1999.  Evaluating the effect of the 1980 
trawl ban in the Java Sea, Indonesia: an ecosys-
tem-based approach. M.Sc. University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada. 
Cheung, K. 1965. Production and use of ice - Hong 
Kong. Pages 97-102 in Indo-Pacific fisheries 
council. 
Cook, D. C., A. L. K. Chan, K. C. C. Fok, and K. D. P. 
Wilson. 1997. A fisheries re source profile prior to 
artificial reef deployment in Hong Kong. in 
PACON 97 symposium on resource development - 
environmental issues and the sustainable devel-
opment of coastal waters, Hong Kong. 
Dalsgaard, A. J. T. 1999. Modeling the Trophic Transfer 
of Beta Radioactivity in the Marine Food Web of 
Enewetak Atoll, Micronesia. M.Sc. Thesis. Uni-
versity of British Columbia, Vancouver. 
EVS 1996. Contaminated Mud Disposal at East Sha 
Chau: Comparative Integrated Risk Assessment. 
Prepared for Hong Kong Government, Civil Engi-
neering Department. 
Froese, R. and D. Pauly 19 98. FishBase 98: Concepts 
Design and Data Sources. ICLARM, Manila. 
Greze, V. N., and O. Kinne 1978. Production of animal 
population. in O. Kinne, editor. Marine Ecology: a 
Comprehensive, Integrated Treatise on Life in 
Oceans and Coastal Waters. Vol. 4. Dynamics. 
John Wiley & Sons, New York. 
Hoyo, J. D., A. Elliott, J. Sargatal, and N. J. Collar 
1992. Handbook of the birds of the world. Inter-
national Council for Bird Preservation. Lynx Edi-
cions, Barcelona. 
Jarre-Teichmann, A., and D. Pauly 1993. Seasonal 
changes in the Peruvian upwelling ecosystem. in 
V. Christensen and D. Pa uly, editors. Trophic 
models of aquatic ecosystems. ICLARM Conf. 
Proc. 26. 
Morton, B. S. 1994. Hong Kong's coral communities: 
status, threats and management plans. Marine 
Pollution Bulletin 29:74-83. 
Morton, B., and J. Morton 1993. The Sea Shore Ecology 
of Hong Kong. Hong Kong University Press, Hong 
Kong. 
N i ,  I .  H . ,  a n d  K .  Y .  K w o k  1 9 9 9 .  M a r i n e  f i s h  f a u n a  i n  
Hong Kong waters. Zoological Studies 38:130-
152. 
Opitz, S. 1998. A quantitati ve model of the trophic in-
teractions in a Caribbean coral reef ecosystem. 
Pages 259-268 in V. Chri stensen and D. Pauly, 
editors. Trophic models of aquatic ecosystems. 
ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26. 
Palomares, M. L. D., and D. Pauly 1998. Predicting 
food consumption of fish populations as functions 
of mortality, food type , morphometrics, tempera-
ture and salinity. Mar. Freshwater. Res. 49:447-
453. 
Pauly, D. 1997. Small-scale fisheries in the tropics: 
marginality, marginalization, and some implica-
tions for fisheries manageme nt. Pages 1-9 in E. K. 
Pikitch, D. D. Huppert, and M. P. Sissenwine, edi-
tors. Global trends: fisheries management. 
Pauly, D., M. L. Soriano-Bartz, and M. L. D. Palomares 
1993. Improved construc tion, parametrization 
and interpretation of steady-state ecosystem 
models. Pages 1-13 in V. Christensen and D. Pauly 
(eds) Trophic models of  aquatic ecosystem. 
ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26. 
Pauly, D., and V. Christensen 1995. Stratified models of 
large marine ecosystems: a general approach and 
an application to the South China Sea :148-174.
 
Pauly, D., V. Christensen and V.J. Sambilay 1990. 
Some features of fish food consumption estimates 
used by ecosystem mode llers. ICES CM 1990/G 
17:8pp. 
Pitcher, T. J., R. Watson, A. Courtney, and D. Pauly 
1998. Assessment of Hong Kong's inshore fishery 
resources. Fisheris Centre  Research Reports 6(1): 
155pp.  
Pitcher, T.J., Watson, R., Haggan, N., Guénette, S., 
Kennish, R., Sumaila, R., Cook, D., Wilson, K. and 
Leung, A. (2000) Marine Reserves and the Restora-
tion of Fisheries and Marine Ecosystems in the 
South China Sea. Bulletin of Marine Science 66(3): 
530-566. 
Polovina, J. J. 1984. Model of a coral reef ecosystem I. 
The ECOPATH model and its application to 
French Frigate Shoals. Coral Reefs 3:1-11. 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 53 
Reilly, S. B., and J. Barlow 1986. Rates of increase in 
dolphin population size. Fishery Bulletin 84:527-
533. 
Sadovy, Y. 1998. Patterns of  reproduction in marine 
fishes of Hong Kong and adjacent waters. Pages 
261-273 in B. Morton, editor. The Third Interna-
tional Conference on the Marine Biology of the 
South China Sea, Hong Ko ng. Hong Kong Univer-
sity Press, Hong Kong. 
Sadovy, Y. J., and A. S. Co rnish 2000. Reef fishes of 
Hong Kong. Hong Kong University Press, Hong 
Kong. 
Silvestre, G., S. Selvanathan,  and A. H. M. Salleh 1993. 
Preliminary trophic model of the coastal fisheries 
resources of Brunei Darussalam, South China Sea. 
Pages 300-306 in V. Chri stensen and D. Pauly, 
editors. Trophic models of aquatic ecosystems. 
ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26. 
Stather, K. 1975. The evolution of fishing craft in Hong 
Kong - 1947 to 1971. Hong Kong fisheries bulletin 
2:1-9. 
Trites, A. W., and D. Pauly 1998. Estimating mean body 
masses of marine mammals  from maximum body 
lengths. Can. J. Zool. 76: 886-896. 
Trites, A., and K. Heise. 1 996. Marine Mammals. In D. 
Pauly and V. Christensen (eds) Mass-balance 
models of Northeastern Pacific ecosystem. Fisher-
ies Centre Research Reports 4(1): 131 pp. 
Trites, A. W., V. Christensen, and D. Pauly 1997. Com-
petition between fisher ies and marine mammals 
for prey and primary prod uction in the Pacific 
Ocean. J. Northw. Atl. Fish. Sci. 22:173-187. 
Wilson, K. D. P. 1997. The Hong Kong marine fish cul-
ture industry - challenges for sustainable devel-
opment. Proceedings of the first international 
symposium on marine conservation Hong Kong 
1:86-97. 
Walters, C., V. Christensen,  and D. Pauly 1997. Struc-
turing dynamic models of exploited ecosystem 
from trophic mass-balance assessment. Reviews 
in Fish Biology and Fisheries 7:139-172. 
 
 
Page 54, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Exploration of Management and 
Conservation Strategies for the 
Multispecies Fisheries of Lake  
Malawi using an Ecosystem  
Modelling Approach  
 
 
Edward Nsiku  
Fisheries Centre, UBC 2 
 
Abstract 
 
Lake Malawi, one the African Great Lakes, is the most 
species-rich freshwater body in the world. Conserva-
tion of the lake is thus one of the important areas that 
needs to be focused by the riparian countries bordering 
it as well as the scientific community and international 
funding agencies. The lake’s ecosystem and fish re-
sources, which are some of the important factors in the 
implementation of conservation initiatives, are ana-
lyzed through construction of an Ecopath model. Ap-
plication of Ecosim routine follows in order to optimize 
policy, particularly of fisheries, in the objectives of 
maximizing fisheries rent, social benefits, rebuilding of 
mandated species and ecosys tem structure or health. 
Trophic interrelationships in the functional groups, 
which include the main fish species caught, and trophic 
structure of the lake are assessed. Twenty-six func-
tional groups are quantified. Chaoborus edulis , En-
graulicypris sardella  larvae and the predatory zoo-
plankton, Mesocyclops aequatorialis aequatorialis , 
form the main pathway through which energy flows 
from bottom to top trophic levels in the Lake Malawi 
ecosystem. The trophic structure of the lake system de-
teriorates over time. Maturity of the lake ecosystem is 
in the middle stages. Standing biomass and production 
rates, i.e. model control re gimes, are dependent more 
on food availability rather than impact of predation. 
The model supports observations of overexploitation in 
most fish resources that form the main fisheries in 
Lake Malawi. This includes even offshore species, espe-
cially those that are also ex ploited by traditional fishers 
such as kampango. The tradit ional fisheries sector con-
tributes more than the commercial sector to the influ-
ence fisheries has on the ecosystem of the lake. The 
analysis optimizes the exploitation and conservation 
goals for the ecosystem and fish resources of Lake Ma-
lawi at reduced fishing effo rt and catch from the cur-
rent levels. 
 
 
 
Introduction  
 
Lake Malawi is the third largest and second deep-
e s t  f r e s h w a t e r  b o d y  i n  A f r i c a .  I t  i s  f o u n d  a t  t h e  
southern tip of the East African Rift Valley. Its ri-
parian countries are Malawi, Mozambique and 
Tanzania. The lake has a total surface area of 
28800 km
2 and an average depth of 292 m, with a 
                                                        
2 Current address: 109-7341 19th Avenue, Burnaby BC, Canada 
V3N 1E3; E-mail: emnsiku@aol.com. 
maximum point of about 700 m. It also contains 7 
% of the world’s total surface fresh water (Patter-
son and Kachinjika 1995). Lake Malawi is among 
lakes with the most abundant fish species in the 
world (Barel et al.  1985; Ribbink 1991; Pitcher 
1994). However, clear waters of low biological 
productivity characterize a large part of the lake 
(ICLARM/GTZ 1991). The southern part is shal-
low and produces a lot of fish food and forms a 
rich-fishing area.  
 
There is an annual cycle of stratification during 
which epi-, meta- and hypo-limnion zones are 
marked from December to  March. Mixing occurs 
from May to August. Depth, temperature and wa-
ter currents cause these events. The first layer ex-
tends from surface of the lake to 125 m in depth. 
The middle layer can be as deep as 230m. Beyond 
this is a third layer, which is permanently strati-
fied and anoxic so that no mixing ever takes place. 
The effect of temperature in the water column is 
marked, with the presence of a sudden transition 
depth range, the thermocline, between 40 and 
60m in January, and extending to 100m by May. 
The thermocline disappears during the cold 
'mwera' season. Wind caus es strong currents so 
that interchange of conditions and other proper-
ties in the two upper layers, occur. Complete nu-
trient mixing, therefore takes place only in the 
two zones. The euphotic zone, i.e. that part of the 
water column in which photosynthesis occurs, ex-
tends to 70m. This is not affected by mixing in the 
upper two zones. Temperature drops as depth in-
creases from the lake surface. As a result, the 
depth or temperature dependent chemical ele-
ments including nutrients also vary (Beadle 1974; 
Eccles 1978; FAO 1993; Patterson and Kachinjika 
1995; Patterson et al.  1 9 9 5 ) .  M i x i n g  o f  n u t r i e n t -
rich deep waters and nutrient poor surface waters 
is vital for sustenance of the fisheries in the lake 
(Arnell et al. 1996; WWF 1999).  
 
The aim of this paper is to identify optimal poli-
cies for exploiting and conserving the fish re-
sources and ecosystem of Lake Malawi. The opti-
mization is based on the basic estimates of an 
ecosystem model of the lake between 1976 and 
1996 (Nsiku 1999). The focus is, however, on eco-
system simulation (Walters et al. 1997; Christen-
sen et al. 2000). The fisheries are optimized in re-
lation to the management goals of maximizing 
rent, social benefits, rebuilding of mandated spe-
cies, ecosystem structure and balancing all the 
goals.  
 
The analysis focuses on traditional and commer-
cial fisheries sectors. These are the main sectors 
in the lake's fisheries apart
 from a minor contri-
bution, in terms of catch amount, of the aquarium 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 55 
or ornamental fisheries sector. The traditional 
fisheries sector is, however, the most important 
with respect to management concerns. 
 
Methods 
 
The trophic structure of the Lake Malawi ecosys-
tem between 1977 and 1996 is constructed using 
Ecopath (Christensen and Pauly 1992) and eco-
system simulation is run for a period of twenty 
years using Ecosim (Walters et al. 1997; Christen-
sen et al. 2000). A mixed control regime is used 
in the simulation.  
 
The Ecopath input data are from research studies 
on Lake Malawi. Four studies contribute most of 
the data. They are the FAO programme between 
1977 and 1981; Malawi Government, UNDP and 
FAO joint study from 1988 to 1992; ODA-
UK/SADC project between 1990 and 1994; and 
I C E I D A  r e s e a r c h  p r o g r a m m e  f r o m  J u n e  1 9 9 4  t o  
March 1996 (Degnbol 1993; FAO 1993; Menz 
1995; Banda and Tomasson 1997). Many other 
sources are also used. However, data for some of 
the trophic boxes are estimated in  the model.  
Diet compositions (Table 1) are from Nsiku 
(1999). In the present analysis the diets are edited 
a little for the lower groups. 
 
The model is set to represent the whole lake as 
one ecosystem. It has twenty-six functional 
groups (Table 2). There are nineteen fish groups 
and single trophic boxes for usipa larvae, phyto-
plankton,
 molluscs, apex predators (fish eating 
avian, reptiles and mammals), zooplankton (her-
bivorous and other species), detritus and lakefly.  
 
The model groups, especially those for fish, are 
identified by their Malawian vernacular names re-
flective of indigenous technical knowledge (Berlin 
1992), particularly of the fishing community's 
perception of similarities in the fish resources. 
The grouping is also guide d by the system defini-
tion, i.e., a functional group may be of ecologically 
or
 taxonomically related species, single species, 
or size/age items (Christensen and Pauly 1992). 
 
A strategy of varying fishing efforts over a twenty-
year period at equilibrium biomass is first consid-
ered. Vulnerability is set at 0.25. Secondly, the ef-
Table 1. Diet Composition for the Lake Malawi Ecopath model functional groups: 1977-1996 (values are rounded to two 
decimal places). 
Prey\Predator 
 
Nkunga 
Kampango 
Matemba 
Utaka 
Ndunduma 
Kambuzi 
Chisawasawa 
Chambo 
Chilunguni 
Mbuna 
Mcheni 
Bombe 
Mlamba 
Usipa 
Usipa larvae 
Sanjika 
Mpasa 
Nchila 
Nkholokolo 
Samwamowa 
Nkhungu 
Nkhono 
Top pred 
Zooplankton 
Nkunga                       0 . 0 1   
Kampango  0 . 0 1                        
Matemba                       0 . 0 5   
Utaka 0.01 0.01 0.01         0. 01 0.01       0.01     
Ndunduma  0.09 0.01        0.01 0.01 0.12       0.01   0.10  
Kambuzi 0.02 0.06 0.01          0.01       0.01     
Chisawasawa   0.01         0.01 0.01       0.01     
Chambo  0.01 0.01          0.01            
Chilunguni  0.01 0.01          0.01            
Mbuna 0.16 0.3 0.07         0.30 0.15       0.05   0.20  
Mcheni  0 . 0 2                        
Bombe            0.01           0.05  
Mlamba            0.01 0.01       0.05     
Usipa 0.05 0.25 0.01        0.28     0.20 0.20        
Usipa larvae   0.01 0.04 0.10     0.05 0.52 0.05    0.38 0.38        
Sanjika                         
Mpasa                         
Nchila                         
Nkholokolo                       0 . 0 2  
Samwamowa                    0.01   0.01  
Nkhungu   0.09 0.22 0.45  0.05   0.07 0.09 0.05  0.03 0.12  0.3 0.3  0.59 0.02     
Nkhono 0.09  0.06 0.02  0.09 0.10   0.01   0.05     0.01 0.15 0.01   0.18  
Top predators                       0 . 1 0   
Zooplankton   0.18 0.20 0.09 0.11 0.12 0.09 0.02 0.20 0.05 0.09 0.02 0.5 0.53 0. 1 0.09 0.01 0.12 0.15 0.53   0.01 
Phytoplankton   0.36 0.48 0.17 0.71 0.67 0. 90 0.90 0.47 0.04  0.25 0. 15 0.45   0.51 0.08 0. 27 0.47 0.15  0.90 
Detritus   0.01 0.02  0.05 0.01 0.01 0.08 0.05 0. 02  0.30     0.17 0.01 0.15  0.20   
Import 0.67 0.24 0.15 0.02 0.20 0. 05 0.05 0.01  0.15  0.46 0.02 0.23 0.02 0.02 0.03 0.30 0.05 0.25 0.01 0.65 0.28 0.09 
Sum 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 
Page 56, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
fect of different management goals on traditional 
and commercial fisheries sectors is analyzed. This 
part covers five management goals  (Table 3). The 
traditional and commercial fisheries sectors are 
applied as fleets with jobs/catch value of 0.741 
and 0.259 respectively. These are based on the to-
tal catches rather than values of the sectors in Ta-
ble 4. 
 
Input fleet costs used in the model fishery simula-
tion are in Table 5. The mandated rebuilding fo-
cuses on seven species-based fisheries (Table 6). 
One modification is made for analysis of fisheries 
sector landings. The catch, which is based on the 
traditional fisheries, is taken to represent total 
catch from Lake Malawi. Proportions of tradi-
tional and commercial fisheries to the total catch 
are based on Turner (197 7), Tweddle and Magasa 
(1989), Pitcher (1994), Turner (1995, 1996), 
Banda et al.  (1996), and Banda and Tomasson 
(1997) for the different species-based fisheries 
(Table 4). 
 
Results  
 
Table 7 details the basic estimates of the model. 
The model is also graphically summarized in Fig-
ure 1. Many groups in lower trophic boxes utilize 
Table 2. Summary of the Lake Malawi ecosystem model functional groups.  
# Local Name Details1 
1 Nkunga Eel Anguilla nebulosa and mastacembelids Mastacembelus shiranus and M. sp. 'Rosette' 
2 Kampango Bagrid catfish Bagrus meridionalis. 
3 Matemba Represents barbel cyprinids, one alestiid, two cyprinodontids and one anabantid.  
4 Utaka Bottom feeding cichlids in genera Copadichromis, Cyrtocara, Maravichromis and Nyas-
sachromis. 
5 Ndunduma Demersal and off-shore cichlids belonging to genera  Diplotaxodon, Palladichromis and 
Placidochromis.  
6 Kambuzi Cichlids in genera Protomelas, Hemitaeniochromis  Dimidiochromis, and Taeniochromis 
7 Chisawasawa Mostly bottom feeding cichlids in genera Lethrinops, Taen iolethrinops and Tramiti-
chromis.  
8 Chambo Refers to three species of pelagic tilapiine cichlids in the genus  Oreochromis; O. 
squampinis, O. lidole and O. karongae. 
9 Chilunguni Two cichlid species, Tilapia rendalli  and Oreochromis shiranus  are specified in this 
group.  
10 Mbuna Rock-dwelling cichlids popular with tropic al fish aquarists and ornamental tropical fish 
trade. Most species belong to genus Pseudotropheus. There are thirteen other mbuna gen-
era
2. 
11 Mcheni Are offshore, pelagic and demersal occurring tigerfish cichlids in the genus Rampho-
chromis. 
12 Bombe Ten species of large clariid catfishes in the genus Bathyclarias.  
13 Mlamba Clariid catfishes in the genus Clarias. There are four species;  C. gariepinus, C. mellandi, 
C. mossambicus and C. theodorae. 
14 Usipa Refers to the cyprinid Engraulicypris sardella.  
15 Usipa larvae Larvae stage of Engraulicypris sardella. 
16 Sanjika Refers to bariliine cyprinid Opsaridium microcephalus 
17 Mpasa The bariliine cyprinid Opsaridium microlepis. 
18 Nchila Represents two cyprinids, Labeo mesops and L.  cylindricus . Only L. mesops supports a 
fishery in the lake. 
19 Nkholokolo Refers to sq ueakers: two small mochokids Synodontis njassae  and Chiloglanis neumanni. 
The main species, S. njassae, is  endemic to the lake. 
20 Samwamowa Represents mormyr id species in the genera of Marcusensis,  Mormyrus and Petrocepha-
lus. 
21 Nkhungu The lakefly Chaoborus edulis forms a key link in energy flow in  the lake ecosystem. 
22 Nkhono The group represents gast ropod and lamellibranch molluscs. 
23 Top predators This group represents higher animals; fish-eating birds, reptiles (monitor lizards and 
crocodiles) and otters. 
24 Zooplankton The group has herb ivorous and carnivorous zooplank ton which  include copepods ( Meso-
cyclops aequatorialis aequatorialis,  Tropodiaptomus canningtoni , and Thermocyclops 
neglectus), cladocerans ( Diaphonosoma excisum  and Bosmina longrostris ), naupulii, 
Diaptomus kraepelini and Mesocyclops leuckarti. 
25 Phytoplankton This functional gr oup includes species in the genera Aulacoseira,  Surirella, Stephanodis-
cus, Mougeotia, Cymatopleura,  Closterium, Synedra and Staurastrum. 
26 Detritus Represents organic matter, either dissolved or particulate. 
 
1. A detailed list of fish species in Lake Malawi is found in Nsiku (1999).  
2. They are Cyathochromis, Cynotilapia, Docimodus, Electochochromis, Exochromis, Fossorochromis, Genyochromis, Gephro-
chromis, Hemitilapia, Iodotrophe us, Melanochromis, Nimbochromis, and Petrotilapia. However, some of the mbuna genera are 
being revised (Snoeks 2000). 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 57 
detritus apart from phytoplankton. The ecotro-
phic efficiencies are in the range of 0.10 - 0.95 ex-
c e p t  f o r  n k h o l o k o l o  a n d  d e t r i t u s  b o t h  o f  w h i c h  
have an EE value of 0.007. It is not clear whether 
this is only due to low predation exerted on the 
groups. Almost all the production over consump-
tion ratio values or gross food conversion effi-
ciencies (GE) fall in the expected range of 0.1 - 
0.3 (Christensen and Pauly 1992). 
 
Two exceptions are the values of nkholokolo and 
top predators at 0.059 and 0.435 respectively. 
G r o u p s  w i t h  G E  v a l u e s  c l o s e  t o  0 . 3  i n c l u d e  
matemba, bombe, usipa and nkhungu. Among 
these functional groups only bombe has relatively 
large-sized species. With the exception of usipa 
larvae which has an R/B value of 458.0 year
-1, the 
respiration over biomass ratios, which can be any 
positive value (Christensen and Pauly 1992), are 
in the normal range of 0-100 (Bundy 1998). 
 
Overall, the value of production over consump-
tion ratio is 0.0005. Therefore, Lake Malawi sys-
tem has very low gross efficiency, i.e. limited 
quantities of discrete trophic flows (Christensen 
and Pauly 1992; Dalsgaard 1999). The lake system 
fishery has a mean trophic level of 3.7. The bio-
mass
 over total throughput is 0.008 year-1 and 
omnivory index is 0.426. The production over 
respiration ratio (P/R) is at 2.95, less than the 
value of 5.88 given in Nsiku (1999).  
 
In the mixed trophic impact (MTI) analysis of the 
Lake Malawi ecosystem, phytoplankton and, to a 
lesser extent detritus have  greatest influence and 
are the basis of energy flow in the lake. Lower 
groups that have positive impact are nkhungu 
Chaoborus edulis, usipa larvae and zooplankton. 
The MTI and graph of model trophic structure 
support observations of Allison et al. (1995a) that 
lakefly, larvae of E. sardella  and predatory zoo-
plankton Mesocyclops aequatorialis aequatori-
alis are the main users of secondary production in 
the Lake Malawi ecosystem. Fish groups that con-
tribute most to the lake system are usipa and 
mbuna. 
Table 3.  Specifications of the management goals utilized for the optimization of the fisheries in Lake Malawi at vul-
nerabilities (V) 0.2, 0.27a, 0.5 and 0.7. 
  Weights assigned to performance indicators 
 
Management goal 
Symbol Net economic 
value 
Social (employment) 
value 
Mandated re-
building 
Ecosystem 
structure 
Optimizing net economic value  MS1 1.0000 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 
Optimizing social (employment) value MS2 0.0001 1.0000 0.0001 0.0001 
Optimizing mandated rebuilding MS3 0.0001 0.0001 1.0000 0.0001 
Optimizing ecosystem structure MS4 0.0001 0.0001 0.0001 1.0000 
Optimizing all goals MS5 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 1.0000 
Table 4. Catch contributions a of the traditional and commercial fleets derived from the 1976-96 mean catch of the 
traditional fisheries in Lake Malawi (values are based on prices of 1996; dash indicates insignificant amount; figures 
are rounded to two decimal places). 
 
Fish Group Fleet b  Catch Value  Price c  
 Total Traditional Commercial Total  Traditional Commercial (MWK/Kg) 
 (t) (t·km -2) (t·km -2) (t·km -2) (MWK'10 6)( M W K ' 1 06)( M W K ' 1 06)  
Chambo 4398 0.15 0.10 0.06 62.63 39.85 22.77 14.24 
Chilunguni 356 0.01 0.01 0.00 3.58 3.58 0.00 10.05 
Kambuzi 2224 0.08 0.08 0. 00 11.36 11.36 0.00 5.11 
Utaka 10271 0.36 0.22 0.14 62.55 38.49 24.06 6.09 
Chisawasawa 179 0.01 0.00 0.01 1.33 0.00 1.33 7.41 
Kampango 2005 0.07 0.04 0.03 17.96 10.78 7.19 8.96 
Mcheni 259 0.01 0.01 0.00 2.00 2.00 0.00 7.72 
Mlamba  1533 0.05 0.04 0.01 12.75 9.57 3.19 8.32 
Usipa 5858 0.20 0.16 0. 04 41.71 33.37 8.34 7.12 
Nchila 168 0.01 0.01 0.00 1.96 1.96 0.00 11.67 
Mpasa 112 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.66 1.66 0.00 14.82 
Sanjika 122 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.15 1.15 0.00 9.39 
Ndunduma 146 0.01 0.00 0.01 1.83 0.00 1.83 12.56 
Bombe 1465 0.05 0.04 0.01 12.19 9.14 3.05 8.32 
Nkholokolo 37 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.29 0.29 0.00 7.72 
Mean 1942 0.07 0.05 0.02 15.66 10.88 4.78 9.30 
Total 29133 1.01 0.71 0.30 234.95 163.19 71.76 139.50 
 
Source for catch: MDF (1996).  aThe proportions of the catches in the sectors are scaled to equal 1 before the amounts are rounded off 
to two decimal places, i. e., fleet jobs/catch value of 0. 741 for traditional and 0.259 for commercial fisheries;  bFleet in this analysis 
designates a fisheries sector comprising of many fishing units, sometimes of different fishing gears; cThis is beach or landing price; 
rate of exchange for 1US$ = 15.3 MWK in 1996 (IMF 1998). 
Page 58, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
A limited positive impact is from ndunduma and 
utaka with much less contribution from chambo 
and kambuzi. With the exception of bombe, terti-
ary consumers with trophic levels of 3.4 and 
above which also include nkunga, kampango, san-
jika, mpasa, mcheni and top predators do not 
have any positive impact in the lake (Figure 2a). 
Each group's contribution to the lake system is 
indicated by its sum of the mixed trophic impacts 
(Figure 2b). Apart from nchila and matemba, 
which have neither positive nor negative total im-
pacting effect but are marginally impacted by the 
lake system, both chambo's impacted and impact-
ing total values are the least. Nkhono is the only 
group with negative total values in its impacted 
and impacting effect. 
 
Figure 3 summarizes the effect of changing 
fishing effort on equilibrium biomass for the 
Lake Malawi ecosystem. Simulation of fisher-
ies of the lake as a whole is achieved by run-
ning the combined fleet option. Vulnerabili-
ties that result in smooth model runs for the 
equilibrium biomass analysis are between 
0.10 and 0.29. A fishing rate of 1.0 does not 
vary biomass in the functional groups. Bio-
mass decreases in almost all fish groups that 
support fishing operations as fishing rate 
rises. The groups most affected are chambo, 
mpasa, kampango, utaka, sanjika, nchila and 
Table 6. Ratios of the fishery groups focused upon for 
the mandated rebuilding management goal; values for 
the analysis are specified for mandated relative bio-
mass and are default for structure relative weight. 
 
 
No. 
 
Group 
Mandated Relative 
Biomass 
Structure Rela-
tive Weight 
1 Kampango 1.0 1.2 
2 Utaka 1.0 2.0 
3 Kambuzi 1.0 2.0 
4 Chambo 1.0 2.0 
5 Sanjika 1.0 1.6 
6 Mpasa 1.0 1.6 
7 Nchila 1.0 0.2 
Table 5.  Some economic factors for Lake Malawi's traditional 
and commercial fisheries sectors. 
 
 
Fishery 
Fixed 
cost 
(%) 
Effort re-
lated to 
cost (%) 
Sailing 
related 
cost (%)
Profit 
 
(%) 
Total 
value 
(%) 
Traditional 0.00 21.20 1.00 77.80 100 
Commercial 30.90 21.40 25.60 22.10 100 
Mean 15.45 21.30 13.30 49.95 100 
 
Data sources used for estimates: ICLARM/GTZ 1991; GOM/UN 1992; 
GOM 1997. 
Table 7. Basic estimate parameters for the Lake Malawi ecos ystem between 1977 and 1996 (estimated Ecopath model 
parameters are in italics/light shading. Dashes mean that data cannot be assigned or is not available; most values are 
rounded to two decimal places). Data sources are given in Nsiku (1999). 
Number 
Group Name 
 
Trophic level 
Biomass 
(t·km-2) 
Production over 
biomass 
(year-1) 
Consumption 
over biomass 
(year-1) 
Ecotrophic effi-
ciency 
Production over 
consumption 
Catch 
(t·km-2·year-1) 
 
Flow to detritus 
(t·km-2·year-1) 
 
Net efficiency 
 
Omnivory index 
 
Respiration 
(t·km-2·year-1) 
 
Assimilation 
(t·km-2·year-1) 
Production over 
respiration 
Respiration over 
biomass 
(year-1) 
1 Nkunga 3.4 0.00  0.80  4.00  0.94 0.20 – 0.00 0.25 0.99 0.00 0.00 0.33 2.40
2 Kampango 3.7 0.28 0.90  5.45 0.34 0.17 0.07 0.47 0.21 0.45 0.97 1.22 0.26 3.46
3 Matemba 2.7 0.00 4.60  11.05 0.87 0.30 – 0.00 20.52 0.68 0.00 0.01 1.09 4.24
4 Utaka 2.6 1.98  0.50  5.67 0.48 0.09 0.36 2.77 0.11 0.49 8.01 9.00 0.12 4.04
5 Ndunduma 3.2 2.49  0.50  5.87 0.76 0.09 0.01 3.23 0.11 0.48 10.45 11.69 0.12 4.20
6 Kambuzi 2.2 0.49  0.50 3.90  0.95 0.13 0.08 0.39 0.16 0.19 1.27 1.52 0.19 2.62
7 Chisawasawa 2.3 0.31  0.50 5.06  0.67 0.10 0.01 0.37 0.12 0.29 1.11 1.27 0.14 3.55
8 Chambo 2.1 0.57  0.50 5.06  0.81 0.10 0.15 0.63 0.12 0.07 2.02 2.30 0.14 3.55
9 Chilunguni 2.0 0.27  0.50  4.48  0.67 0.11 0.01 0.28 0.14 0.01 0.08 0.96 0.16 3.08
10 Mbuna 2.5 7.47  0.50 5.06  0.67 0.10 – 8.79 0.12 0.45 26.49 30.23 0.14 3.55
11 Mcheni 3.5 0.29  0.50  5.39 0.28 0.09 0.01 0.41 0.12 0.17 1.09 1.23 0.13 3.81
12 Bombe 3.4 1.11 0.90  3.31 0.09 0.27 0.05 1.64 0.34 0.78 1.94 2.94 0.52 1.75
13 Mlamba 2.7 1.16 0.90  5.33 0.15 0.17 0.05 2.13 0.21 0.78 3.91 4.96 0.27 3.36
14 Usipa 2.9 0.56 2.50  9.23 0.76 0.27 0.20 1.36 0.34 0.31 2.73 4.13 0.51 4.88
15 Usipa larvae 2.5 0.13  62.00 650.00 0.61 0.10 – 20.07 0.12 0.22 59.54 67.60 0.14 458.00
16 Sanjika 3.6 0.03 0.60  6.21 0.22 0.10 0.00 0.05 0.12 0.07 0.13 0.15 0.14 4.37
17 Mpasa 3.6 0.02 0.60  4.23 0.33 0.14 0.00 0.03 0.18 0.07 0.06 0.07 0.22 2.78
18 Nchila 2.0 0.01 4.00  40.00 0.15 0.10 0.01 0.11 0.13 0.09 0.28 0.32 0.14 28.00
19 Nkholokolo 3.2 0.59  0.50  8.50 0.01 0.06 0.00 1.30 0.07 0.24 3.72 4.01 0.08 6.30
20 Samwamowa 2.6 0.00  1.95  11.62 0.36 0.17 – 0.00 0.21 0.70 0.01 0.01 0.27 7.35
21 Nkhungu 2.5 1.75 19.40  69.70  0.47 0.28 – 42.39 0.35 0.21 63.62 97.58 0.53 36.36
22 Nkhono 2.0 5.00 0.42 5.60  0.95 0.08 – 5.71 0.09 0.15 20.29 22.40 0.10 4.06
23 Top predators 3.6 0.00 25.22  58.00  0.23 0.44 – 0.03 0.54 0.73 0.02 0.05 1.19 21.18
24 Zooplankton 2.0 5.38  30.50  144.57 0.93 0.21 – 167.79 0.26 0.03 458.14 622.23 0.36 85.16
25 Phytoplankton 1.0 7.62 258.40 – 0.36 – – 1257.14 – 0.00 0.00 – – –
26 Detritus 1.0 – – – 0.01 – – 0.00 – 0.25 0.00 – – –
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 59 
kambuzi. A limited drop in biomass is also ob-
served in usipa, chilunguni and bombe. However 
only two fish groups; nkholokolo and ndunduma 
gain some biomasses. Mcheni, chisawasawa and 
mlamba are not affected by a change in the fish-
ing rate. There is a reversal in trends when the 
fishing rate decreases. Lower groups of usipa 
larvae, zooplankton and phytoplankton as well 
as the functional groups that do not currently 
support active fisheries are not directly affected 
by varying fishing rates. The only linked group of 
juveniles and adults in the model, usipa and its 
larvae, does not produce any smooth simulated 
pattern. The linkage is thus not effected in the 
present simulation of Lake Malawi ecosystem.  
 
The effect of varying fishing rate in the tradi-
tional and commercial fisheries sectors is in gen-
eral similar to that observed in Fig. 3. Positions 
of fish groups, with respect to extent of changes 
in biomass, are however different. In the tradi-
tional fisheries groups, which have the worst bio-
mass reduction, we find mpasa, chambo, 
kampango, sanjika, kambuzi, utaka and nchila. 
There is a biomass increase in ndunduma. Bio-
mass gain is only barely perceptible in 
nkholokolo and chisawasawa. The ratio of bio-
mass over original biomass is close to unity in 
bombe and mlamba. Fish groups with a marginal 
Figure 1. Graphic summarization of the Lake Malawi ecosystem trophic structure between 1977 and 1996.  
Figure 2a . Mixed trophic impact of the Lake Malawi ecosystem be-
tween 1977 and 1996. 
Page 60, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
decrease in biomass are similar to those in the 
combined fleet option. For the commercial fisher-
ies decrease in biomass occurs in chambo, utaka, 
kampango and, to a very limited extent, chisawa-
sawa. Kambuzi gains a little biomass. The ratio of 
biomass over original biomass is almost constant 
in bombe, mlamba, ndunduma and usipa.
 
 
Figure 4 shows the optimized ‘end over starting 
effort’ (E/S) ratios for the management goals in 
the model fishing policy searches. Optimization of 
fisheries decreases 
effort in the man-
agement goals. 
There are, however, 
a number of in-
stances that opti-
mize specific fish-
ing policy objectives 
at efforts above the 
base levels. These 
occur in all the 
management goals 
except for that of 
optimizing man-
dated rebuilding of 
species (MS3). For 
the management 
goal of optimizing 
economic value 
(MS1), effort above 
the base level oc-
curs in the category of the traditional fisheries at 
all vulnerabilities. In the management goal of op-
timizing social (employment) value (MS2), com-
mercial fisheries category has two outlier E/S ef-
fort ratios of 20.37 and 20.09 at vulnerability lev-
els of 0.7 and 0.5 respectively. These are omitted 
from Figure 4b.  
 
Other efforts exceeding the starting levels are in 
traditional fisheries category at all vulnerabilities 
as well as in categories of total and social values 
-1.15
-0.50
0.15
0.80
1.45
Nkunga
Kampango
Matemba
Utaka
Ndunduma
Kambuzi
Chisawasawa
Chambo
Chilunguni
Mbuna
Mcheni
Bombe
Mlamba
Usipa
Usipa larvae
Sanjika
Mpasa
Nchila
Nkholokolo
Samwamowa
Nkhungu
Nkhono
Top predators
Zooplankton
Phytoplankton
Detritus
Fishery
Impacting Impacted
Figure 2b. Mixed trophic impacts summed up for each functional  group in the Lake Malawi ecosystem; impacting 
value of phytoplankton is 9.23, it is not fully shown in the graph. 
Figure 3. Trends of the ratios of biomass over starting biomass in the species-based fisher-
ies in Lake Malawi when fishing rate varies over a twenty-year simulation period while ap-
plying a mixed control regime or vulnerabilit y of 0.25 for model equilibrium biomass simu-
lation. 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 61 
at vulnerability 0.7. The only negative E/S effort 
ratio value of -0.84 also occurs in MS2 for the 
economic category at vulnerability 0.5. In MS3 
decreased effort ratios are in categories of eco-
nomic and social values while in the rest they are 
almost unity. The management goal of optimizing 
ecosystem structure (MS4) generates effort levels 
that increase with vuln erabilities for ecosystem 
structure and total value categories. 
 
The E/S effort ratios for MS4's mandated rebuild-
ing category remain at unity. In the remaining op-
timized categories of MS4, effort decreases at all 
vulnerabilities. The heaviest drop is in traditional 
fisheries category. The management goal of opti-
mizing all objectives (MS5) has above base effort 
in traditional fisheries ca tegory at vulnerabilities 
0.2 and 0.27 as well as ecosystem structure cate-
gory for vulnerability levels of 0.5 and 0.7. If equi-
librium biomass vulnerabilities (i.e., with maxi-
mum of 0.29) are taken into account, only vul-
nerabilities of 0.2 and 0. 27 may be focused on. In 
this case E/S effort ratios above unity fall in the 
1.086 - 3.093 range and are obtained in the tradi-
tional fisheries category for MS1, MS2 and MS5. 
For MS4 they are in the total value and ecosystem 
structure categories
.  
 
Figure 5 shows catch trends for the traditional 
and commercial fisheries in all the management 
goals. The traditional fisheries catch ratios have 
similar trends to those of total fisheries for almost 
all cases. E/S catch ratios in the management 
goals are either unity or less except in MS4 (Fig. 
5d). In MS1 catch ratios increase for the tradi-
tional fisheries as the vulnerabilities rise. The 
commercial fisheries' catch ratios decrease at vul-
nerabilities between 0.2 and 0.27 and rise again 
through to vulnerability 0.7. 
 
The catch ratios in MS2 are lowest at vulnerability 
0.5. In MS3 the E/S catch ratios are unity at vul-
nerabilities 0.2 and 0.27 but they are lower at 
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
TV EV SV MR ES TF CF
Optimized category
MS5V0.20 MS5V0.27 MS5V0.50 MS5V0.70
Fig. 4e
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
TV EV SV MR ES TF CF
Optimized category
MS1V0.20 MS1V0.27 MS1V0.50 MS1V0.70
Fig. 4a
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
TV EV SV MR ES TF CF
Optimized category
MS1V0.20 MS1V0.27 MS1V0.50 MS1V0.70
Fig. 4a
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
TV EV SV MR ES TF CF
Optimized category
MS1V0.20 MS1V0.27 MS1V0.50 MS1V0.70
Fig. 4a
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
TV EV SV MR ES TF CF
Optimized category
MS1V0.20 MS1V0.27 MS1V0.50 MS1V0.70
Fig. 4a
Figure 4 . E/S effort ratios simulated for the different 
vulnerabilities in the manage ment goals of optimizing 
economic value (MS1, 4a); social (employment) value 
(MS2, 4b); mandated rebuilding of species (MS3, 4c); 
ecosystem structure (MS4, 4d);and all objectives (MS5, 
4e).  The optimized categories  in each management goal 
is represented by abbreviations TV for total value, EV for 
economic value, SV for social value, MR for mandated 
rebuilding, ES for ecosystem st ructure, TF for traditional 
fisheries, and CF for commercial fisheries. 
Page 62, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
vulnerabilities 0.5 and 0.7. In MS4 and MS5 
commercial fisheries obtain higher E/S catch ra-
tios than traditional or total fisheries at all vul-
nerability levels. The fisheries simulated values 
mirror trends of the catches. At 1996 prices, Lake 
M a l a w i  f i s h e r i e s  o b t a i n  i n  M a l a w i  k w a c h a  p e r  
tonne (MWK/t) a total value or market value of 
8204.48; total fixed cost of 689.9; total variable 
cost of 2375.1; total cost of 3065.01; and profit of 
5139.47. Considering that only the traditional 
fisheries catch has been used as input for model 
simulation, the summary values fall short of ac-
tual values by at least 15 %, which is the average 
contribution of the commercial fisheries to the 
lake's total landings. The cost does not change in 
commercial fisheries for all management goals. 
Traditional fisheries do not generate any costs 
probably due to nil fixed cost entry in Table 5. 
 
Table 8 details the values of performance indica-
tors at all vulnerability levels in the management 
strategies for both open and close loop model 
simulations. Within performance indicators 
higher values are in general optimized at lower 
vulnerability values. Each management goal op-
timizes fisheries in its own performance indica-
tor, for example, MS1 generates highest values in 
economic value indicator at all vulnerability lev-
els. However, at vulnerability 0.5, the economic 
indicator is optimized in MS2 instead of in MS1. 
Optimized indicator values are higher in open 
loop than in closed loop simulations. There are a 
few exceptions, though. The close loop has higher 
indicator values for mandated rebuilding and 
ecosystem structure in MS2 at vulnerability 0.27. 
The same occurs at a vulnerability of 0.7 for man-
dated rebuilding indicator in MS4. Values of per-
formance indicators are similar, again, for man-
dated rebuilding in MS3 and MS4 at vulnerabili-
ties of 0.2, 0.27 and 0.5. Both mandated rebuild-
ing and overall value optimize the same values in 
open and closed loops at vulnerabilities of 0.2, 
0.27 and 0.5 in MS4. Only vulnerability 0.7 has 
similar overall indicator value in MS4 for open 
and closed loops  
Figure 5. E / S catch ratios simulated at the dif-
ferent vulnerabilities in the management goals of 
optimizing economic value (MS1,  Fig. 5a); social 
(employment) value(MS2, Fig. 5b); mandated re-
building of species (MS3, Fig. 5c); ecosystem 
struc-ture (MS4, 5d); and all objectives (MS5, Fig. 
5e) for the optimized categories of traditional 
(TF), commercial (CF) and total fisheries.
 
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
V0.20 V0.27 V0.50 V0.70
Vulnerability level
TF CF TOTAL Fig. 5e
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
V0.20 V0.27 V0.50 V0.70
Vulnerability level
TF CF TOTAL
Fig. 5a
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
V0.20 V0.27 V0.50 V0.70
Vulnerability level
TF CF TOTAL
Fig. 5a
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
V0.20 V0.27 V0.50 V0.70
Vulnerability level
TF CF TOTAL
Fig. 5a
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
V0.20 V0.27 V0.50 V0.70
Vulnerability level
TF CF TOTAL
Fig. 5a
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 63 
Discussion 
 
Increasing the predation on phytoplankton and 
detritus lowers the mean trophic level of the Lake 
M a l a w i  e c o s y s t e m .  R e d u c i n g  a  p a r t  o f  c o n s u m p -
tion on zooplankton to mainly phytoplankton and 
detritus in most groups that feed on zooplankton, 
shifted the mean trophic level from 3.8 in Nsiku 
(1999) to 3.7 in the present model run. 
Chaoborus edulis  and E. sardella  larvae link to 
more trophic groups at the top than other middle 
level groups except for zooplankton. The two 
groups together with predatory zooplankton, 
Mesocyclops a. aequatorialis , are main users of 
secondary production and form the main pathway 
through which enegry flows to top trophic levels 
in the Lake Malawi ecosystem from the low tro-
phic levels of phytoplankton and herbivorous 
zooplankton (Allison et al.  1995a). The trophic 
structure of the lake system seems to decline with 
time, similar to occurrence of 'feeding down the 
food web' (Pauly et al.  1998). The species which 
appear in the pelagic zone of the central Lake Ma-
lawi ecosystem (Degnbol 1993) or the pelagic 
zone ecosystem (Allison et al. 1995a) and current 
model, occupy lower trophic levels in the latter 
model (Nsiku 1999). Although there are differ-
ences in input data such as longer time span in 
the current model, most data are from similar 
sources. Decline of the trophic structure is also 
demonstrated by analysis of mean maximum 
length of the lake's catch, which dropped between 
1976 and 1996 (Nsiku 1999).  
 
Bombe is among the fish groups with high gross 
food conversion efficiency (GE) values or ratios of 
production over consumption in the lake system. 
Unlike matemba and usipa (maximum length 3-
15 cm) which are small, bombe is large (maxi-
mum length 70-150 cm). Matemba species such 
as Barbus paludinosus  and B. trimaculatus  are 
shown in aquaculture to be prolific spawners and 
have a high growth potential (Brummett and No-
ble 1995). Usipa is also fast growing (Thompson 
1995). One of the influencing factors for bombe’s 
high GE may be fast growth rate. This agrees with 
preliminary work on raising bombe in ponds (E. 
Kaunda pers. comm .). Other possible reasons 
may be the fact that the input P/B is from a dif-
ferent species and model with different ecosystem 
environment as well as exploitation rates (Nsiku 
1999).  
 
The Lake Malawi ecosystem P/R of 2.95 is still on 
the high side of the 0.8-3.2 range within which 
most Ecopath models fall (Christensen and Pauly 
1993). It is expected that a properly accounted for 
ecosystem, with respect to its energy flow, would 
have a P/R close to 1 (Christensen and Pauly 
1992). This also occurs in more mature systems. 
In the case of Lake Malawi, the high P/R may be 
due to the fact that it is not completely 'mature' in 
relative terms. Another cause of the problem may 
be that some parameters such as respiration or ef-
fect of items like bacteria are not adequately 
quantified (Christensen and Pauly 1993). Al-
though detritus impacts the Lake Malawi ecosys-
tem positively, it is not strong. Detritus is also 
said to be less important in the lake's energy flow 
(Allison et al.  1995a). Detrital flow is low in the 
Table 8.Values of performance indicators at all the vulnerability levels in the management strategies for both the open 
(left column) and closed (right column) loop model simulations. 
Management Performance indicator 
Strategy & 
Vulnerability 
Net Economic 
Value 
Social (Employment) 
Value 
Mandated  
Rebuilding 
Ecosystem  
Structure 
Overall Value 
 open closed open closed open closed open closed open closed 
MS1 V=0.20 196232.07 160825.20 202222.15 15 2294.40 96.51 94.58 523.90 520.83 0.66 0.54
MS2 V=0.20 181348.42 157433.70 210633.04 1604 56.30 68.74 68.56 480.89 480.68 0.94 0.71
MS3 V=0.20 145361.09 119597.00 124797.74 9 4968.30 140.00 138.71 596.43 594.45 1.00 0.99
MS4 V=0.20 20430.82 16943.53 13410.77 10 181.65 140.00 140.00 653.18 652.97 1.10 1.10
MS5 V=0.20 185061.69 148620.00 180019.30 13 4432.70 117.86 116.32 558.49 555.99 3.20 2.86
MS1 V=0.27 182134.68 146312.30 184661.03 135347.90 99.86 98.52 531.56 529.50 0.62 0.50
MS2 V=0.27 168508.93 145273.9 0 192192.38 146155.90 70.20 71.01 487.50 488.71 0.85 0.65
MS3 V=0.27 145687.47 118361.80 125029.85 9 3190.99 140.00 138.35 596.12 594.08 1.00 0.99
MS4 V=0.27 19853.77 16125.13 12436.20 93 11.55 140.00 140.00 667.17 667.02 1.12 1.12
MS5 V=0.27 171472.05 136391.90 164458.43 122449.90 123.04 121.17 567.98 564.99 3.14 2.82
MS1 V=0.50 168251.32 131335.40 160457.91 117728.00 112.94 111.85 557.33 554.86 0.57 0.44
MS2 V=0.50 157890.96 132197.80 166253.75 126 211.50 79.23 79.02 507.84 507.61 0.74 0.56
MS3 V=0.50 146180.85 118154.00 124911.92 93813.05 140.00 137.43 597.63 593.57 1.00 0.98
MS4 V=0.50 16425.13 12918.34 9123.84 678 6.05 140.00 140.00 736.43 736.09 1.24 1.24
MS5 V=0.50 153458.06 119563.90 134500.34 99911. 05 136.57 135.25 612.48 608.84 3.12 2.84
MS1 V=0.70 182582.18 134848.90 162186.55 11 5608.70 123.95 121.98 601.41 596.40 0.62 0.46
MS2 V=0.70 177840.06 133383.00 166643.20 118465.60 105.10 103.28 556.33 551.89 0.74 0.53
MS3 V=0.70 147025.09 116589.60 125167.47 9 2295.85 140.00 137.18 598.83 593.86 1.00 0.98
MS4 V=0.70 19088.30 14118.69 9802.95 703 9.81 139.94 139.95 837.92 837.49 1.41 1.41
MS5 V=0.70 176321.30 126592.30 151987.72 10553 8.60 136.29 135.74 647.64 641.18 3.33 2.94
Page 64, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
trophic efficiency transf ers in the lake system. 
This provides a clear means to designate the ma-
turity of Lake Malawi ecosystem. Since detrital 
flow becomes more important in mature systems 
(Christensen and Pauly 1992; Dalsgaard 1999) it 
can therefore be safely said that Lake Malawi is 
still between the early and middle stages of its 
maturity. However when the formation of the 
E a s t  A f r i c a n  R i f t  V a l l e y  i s  c o n s i d e r e d  a s  w e l l  a s  
the history of Lake Malawi, particularly of its 
fisheries (Potts 1999; Bertram et al. 1942), it may 
be more appropriate to designate the maturity of 
the lake to be in its middle stages. 
 
Although Ecosim has some limitations, it is very 
effective in simulating  changes in biomasses 
given changes in fishing pressure (Walters et al.  
1997; Christensen et al.  2000; Christensen and 
Walters 2000). The software has properties that 
are handy in the simulation of the Lake Malawi 
ecosystem for a period of 20 years. With the 
specification of the fishing mortalities, which is 
achieved through fixing vulnerabilities and fish-
ing rates in the model, the Ecosim routine is able 
to effectively follow changes in fish production 
and potentials of all biomass pathways for the 
lake ecosystem during the simulation period. The 
choice of the model control regime, which is set at 
0.25 (mixed control) for the equilibrium biomass 
fisheries analysis, is plausible. In the present 
model simulation, smooth trends of biomass over 
original (Ecopath equilibrium) biomass are only 
obtained in the vulnerability range of 0.1 and 
0.29. The mixed control regime for the Lake Ma-
lawi ecosystem is further based on the presence of 
food supply limitation, i.e. bottom-up control, 
which is interpreted, at least for this analysis, to 
have more effect than predation, i.e., top-down 
control. The chambo studies in the southern part 
of Lake Malawi (FAO 1993), experience of trophic 
control in the pelagic zone system in the lake (Al-
lison et al. 1995b) and feeding ecology of some of 
the species (Yamaoka 1991) show this view 
clearly. The FAO chambo study, after analyzing 
the 1982 -1986 catches, points out the possibility 
of factors other than fishing (or predation) to 
have influenced the fish biomass and production. 
Allison et al.  (1995b) found higher planktonic 
biomasses of organisms, comprising of both pro-
d u c e r s  a n d  c o n s u m e r s ,  i n  1 9 9 3  t h a n  1 9 9 2  w h i c h  
leads to increased carbon  transfer in the food 
chain. This constitutes the evidence of their 
standing biomasses and production rates being 
c o n t r o l l e d  b y  f o o d  s u p p l y .  I t  i s  a l s o  f o u n d  t h a t  
predator control is available through a rapid re-
sponse of predator populations to increases in 
prey populations. Yamaoka (1991) emphasizes the 
food partitioning rather than complete food re-
source sharing between species which may be as-
sumed to show superabundance of food and thus 
food supply not to be important in system con-
trol. Cichlids of Lake Malawi have a wide range of 
feeding habits, although many other species com-
pete for the same food resources. There is, thus, 
resource partitioning in fish feeding behaviour in 
the lake, particularly among its cichlids. This is 
shown by stomach content analysis, as well as de-
tailed examination of species that share the same 
trophic requirements. They exhibit slight but 
clear variations in feedin g ecology with regard to 
behaviour, sites and habitat. 
 
It is important to focus on the traditional fisheries 
when exploring fishing policies for Lake Malawi. 
This is because the sector has the majority of fish-
ing operations on the lake and access to it is free 
(ICLARM/GTZ 1991; FAO 1993; Donda 1998). It 
i s  a l s o  d i f f i c u l t  t o  m a n a g e  ( S c h o l z  et al.  1997). 
Factors that further impa ct management of the 
sector include limitations in alternative income 
generating opportunities and access to adequate 
land, politics or sectoral conflicts, high population 
and resource constraints on the part of Govern-
ment (GOM 1989; FAO 1993; Nyambose 1997; 
Scholz et al. 1997). In addition, the main fishing 
area for the traditional fisheries, inshore pelagic 
zone, is now fully exploited and expansion of the 
fish resources is thus not attainable 
(ICLARM/GTZ 1991; FAO 1993; Menz et al. 1995; 
Banda and Tomasson 1997). Opportunity to ex-
tend to offshore is restri cted by unsuitability of 
craft to safely navigate the offshore waters, and 
gears to catch demersal species (GOM 1989; 
Thompson et al.  1995; Banda and Tomasson 
1997).  
 
One modification is made for analysis of fisheries 
sector landings in Lake Malawi due to unavail-
ability of all commercial catches by species for the 
model period. However, fisheries have major im-
pact on the lake ecosystem, in addition to other 
factors such as environmental degradation. Tradi-
tional fisheries influence biomass and catch of the 
functional groups more than commercial fisheries 
at the equilibrium bioma ss analysis of fisheries 
sectors in the lake. The biomass of fish groups, 
which do not form fisheries in the lake particu-
larly for ndunduma, mbuna, top predators and 
nkhono, have opposing trends to those of species-
based fisheries in response to varying the fishing 
rates. The differences can be attributed to the fact 
that diets of the fish groups in the two categories 
overlap (Table 1). The consequence is that food 
supply increases when fishing rate is high as ex-
ploited fish groups are depleted. Pressure for food 
increases when fishing rate is reduced affecting 
the biomasses of some groups including ndun-
duma, mbuna, top predators and nkhono. This 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 65 
observation seems to also support the concepts of 
food partitioning and food supply as a control re-
gime for the lake's ecosystem (Yamaoka 1991; Al-
lison et al.  1995b). The variation of fishing rates 
to above and below the equilibrium biomass level 
has the effect of reversing outcomes. This is 
probably due, in part, to vulnerability exchange in 
the Ecosim routine (Walters et al. 1997) as well as 
the fact that all other pa rameters for determining 
the biomass in the Ecopath model do not vary 
during simulation.  
 
The fishing policy searches optimize the lake eco-
system and its fisheries mainly through decreas-
ing effort. Again, the pervasive effect of the tradi-
tional fisheries sector is reflected in the manage-
ment goal of optimizing all objectives (MS5). The 
goal optimizes effort above base in the category of 
the sector's fisheries for the equilibrium biomass 
vulnerabilities 0.2 and 0.27. Like effort, the catch 
drops while optimizing the fisheries of the Lake 
Malawi system. The trend of value in the man-
agement goals follows that of the catch. However, 
summary values for the fisheries in the lake as a 
whole are quite substantial at the 1996 prices. 
Reduction of effort and catch to optimize the 
management goals improves the health status of 
the lake ecosystem and its fisheries. The main 
recommendations for the development of fisher-
ies in Lake Malawi from the FAO (1993) study 
support this view. The study finds chambo stocks 
fully exploited while the deep-water hap-
lochromine trawl fishery is severely depleted, at 
least in the southeast arm of the lake. Further, the 
benefit of reducing effort and catch is in terms of 
reversing not only degradation of fish resources 
but also the worsening of environmental condi-
tions. First, there will be regeneration of fish 
breeding or nesting areas as a result of reduced 
numbers of gears that are dragged on the lake 
bottom (Banda and Hara 1994). Second, overfish-
ing will be abated. As a consequence species such 
as nchila Labeo mesops whose catches have been 
in decline for a long time (Tweddle et al. 1994) or 
overfished in the case of chambo ( Oreochromis 
spp.) in Lake Malombe (FAO 1993) may have a 
chance to rebuild. The danger of certain species, 
which are not well known disappearing without 
being noticed (Munthali 1997), can be removed. 
Finally changes in composition of catch and fish 
size, which have been noticed in the southern part 
of Lake Malawi (Turner 1977; Tweddle and Ma-
gasa 1989; Turner et al.  1995) and are probably 
continuing to occur, will be stopped.  
 
Conclusion 
 
The best management goal or fishing policy that 
optimizes exploitation and conservation of the 
fish resources in Lake Malawi is to reduce the 
current fishing effort. In this way the ecosystem 
integrity of the lake or its health status, as it is 
now, will be maintained. Effort and thus catch 
may only be increased for selected offshore and 
demersal groups of species such as ndunduma 
and nkholokolo. It may have been most ideal to 
develop a ‘guarded’ fishery for nkhono but locally 
it is viewed as not edible. The potential lies in ex-
ploring a market for the product first. Mbuna has 
the largest biomass among the fish groups in the 
lake. It is however not advisable to develop a fish-
ery as the group is also the most diverse in num-
ber of species (Ribbink 1991). An established fish-
ery can easily disturb the balance and result in 
dissemination of some individual species in the 
mbuna complex. Some of the fish groups may 
benefit from a period of closure apart from a re-
duction in fishing effort. The chambo fishery is 
especially in need of urgent attention. The fisher-
ies of kambuzi, sanjika, mpasa as well as nchila 
are dwindling. In spite of  the fact that utaka and 
kampango are largely semi-pelagic or demersal in 
the offshore, which limits the fishing pressure 
from the majority of fishers in the lake, they are 
still fully exploited. The six groups also require 
reassessment and immediate reduction from the 
current level of fishing effort.  
 
References  
 
Allison, E.H., G. Patterson, K. Irvine, A.B. Thompson 
and A. Menz 1995a. The pelagic ecosystem, p. 351-
386. In A. Menz (ed.) The fishery potential and pro-
ductivity of the pelagic zone of Lake Malawi/Niassa, 
NRI/ODA. 386 pp. 
Allison, E.H., A.B. Thomps on, B.P. Ngatunga, and K. 
Irvine. 1995b. The diet and food consumption rates 
of the offshore fish, p. 233-278. In A. Menz (ed.) 
The fishery potential and productivity of the pelagic 
zone of Lake Malawi/Niassa, NRI/ODA. 386 pp. 
Arnell, N., B. Bates, H. Lang, J. J. Mugnuson and P. 
Mulholland (Editors). 1996. Hydrology and fresh-
water ecology, p. 325-363. In R. T. Watson, M.C. 
Zinyowera and R. H. Moss (eds.) Climate change 
1995; impacts, adaptations and mitigation of cli-
mate change: Scientic-t echnical analysis. Cam-
bridge University Press. New York. 878 pp. 
Banda, M. and M.Hara 1994. Habitat degradation 
caused by seines on the fishery of Lake Malombe 
and Upper Shire River and its effects. Paper pre-
sented at the FAO/CIFA Seminar on Inland Fisher-
ies, Aquaculture and the Environment. Harare, 
Zimbabwe, 5-7 December, 1994. 12 pp. 
Banda, M. C. and T. Toma sson 1997. Demersal fish 
stocks in southern Lake Malawi: Stock assessment 
and exploitation, Government of Malawi, Fisheries 
Department, Fisheries Bulletin No. 35. 39 pp. 
Banda, M., T. Tomasson and D. Tweddle 1996. Assess-
ment of the deep water trawl fisheries of the south-
east arm of Lake Malawi using exploratory surveys 
and commercial catch data, p.  53-75. In I.G. Cowx 
Page 66, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
(ed.) Stock assessment in inland fisheries. Fishing 
News Books/Hartnolls Ltd. Cornwall. 513 pp. 
Barel, C.D.N., R. Dorit, P.H. Greenwood, G. Fryer, N. 
Hughes, P.B.N. Jackson, H. Kawanabe, R. H. 
McConnell, M. Nagishi, A.J. Ribbink, E. Trewavas, 
F. Witte and K. Yamaoka 1985. Commentary: De-
struction of fisheries in Africa's lakes. Nature 315: 
19-20. 
Beadle, L.C. 1974. The inland waters of tropical Africa: 
An introduction to tropic al limnology, Longman, 
London. 365 pp. 
Berlin, B. 1992. Ethnobiologi cal classification: Princi-
ples of categorization of plants and animals in tradi-
tional societies. Princeton University Press, Prince-
ton. 335 pp. 
B e r t r a m ,  C .  K .  R . ,  H .  J .  H .  B o r l e y  a n d  E .  T r e w a v a s  
1942. Report on the fish and fisheries of Lake 
N y a s a .  P u b l i s h e d  o n  b e h a l f  o f  t h e  G o v e r n m e n t  o f  
Nyasaland [Malawi] by the Crown Agents of the 
Colonies, London. 181 pp. 
Brummett, R.E. and R. Noble 1995. Aquaculture for Af-
rican smallholders. Manila, Philippines. ICLARM 
Tech. Rep. 46. 69 pp. 
Bundy, A. 1997. Assessment and management of mul-
tispecies, multigear fisheries: a case study from San 
Miguel Bay, Philippines. Ph .D. Thesis University of 
British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada. 396 pp. 
Christensen, V. and D. Pauly 1992. A guide to Ecopath 
II software system (version 2.1). ICLARM. Software. 
6. 72 pp. 
Christensen, V. and D. Pauly. 1993. Flow characteristics 
of aquatic ecosystems. Pages 338-352 in V. Chris-
tensen and D. Pauly (eds .) Trophic models of 
aquatic ecosystems. ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26. 390 
pp. 
Christensen, V, C.J. Walter s and D. Pauly. 2000. Eco-
path with Ecosim: a User's Guide, October 2000 
Edition. Fisheries Centre, University of British Co-
lumbia, Vancouver, Canada and ICLARM, Penang, 
Malaysia. 130 pp (accessible on website 
http://www.ecopath.org). 
Christensen, V. and C.J. Walters 2000. Ecopath with 
Ecosim: methods, capabilities and limitations. 26 
pp. (accessible on website http:// 
www.fisheries.ubc.ca).  
Dalsgaard, A.J. 1999. Modelli ng the trophic transfer of 
beta radioactivity in the marine food of the 
Enewetak Atoll, Micronesia. MSc. thesis. University 
of British Columbia, Vancouver, B.C., Canada. 125 
pp.  
Degnbol, P. 1993. The Pelagic Zone of Central Lake Ma-
lawi: A Trophic box model. Pages 110-115 in V. 
Christensen and D. Pauly (e ds.) Trophic models of 
aquatic ecosystems. ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26. 390 
pp.
 
Donda, S. 1998. Fisheries co-management in Malawi: 
Case study of Lake Chiuta fi sheries, p.21-39. In A.K. 
Norman, J.R. Neilsen an d S. Sverdrup-Jensen 
(eds.) Fisheries co-management in Africa. Fish. Co-
mgmt. Res. Project, Res. Rpt. 12. 326 pp. 
E c c l e s ,  D .  H .  1 9 6 2 .  A n  i n t e r n a l  w a v e  i n  L a k e  N y a s a  
(now Malawi) and its probable significance in the 
nutrient cycle. Nature 194(4831): 832-833. 
FAO 1993. Fisheries manageme nt in the southeast arm 
of Lake Malawi, the Upper Shire River and Lake 
Malombe,  with  par ticular  reference to the fisheries 
on chambo ( Oreochromis spp.). CIFA Technical 
Paper. No. 21. Rome, FAO. 113 pp. 
Government of Malawi (GOM) 1989. Statement of de-
velopment policies, 1987-1996. Government 
Printer, Zomba, Malawi. p. 1-21, 42-48. 
Government of Malawi and United Nations in Malawi 
(GOM/UN) 1992. The situation analysis of poverty 
in Malawi (Draft). UNICEF. Lilongwe. 202 pp. 
Government of Malawi 1997. Economic report 1997. 
Ministry of Economic Planning and Development, 
Government Printer, Zomba, Malawi. 118 pp. 
ICLARM/GTZ 1991. The context of small-scale inte-
grated agriculture-aquaculture in Africa: a case 
study of Malawi. ICLARM Stud. Rev. 18. 302 pp.  
IMF 1998. IMF approves thir d annual ESAF credit for 
Malawi, Press release No. 98/63. IMF, Washington, 
D.C. 14 pp (accessible on website http:// 
www.imf.org).
 
Malawi Fisheries Departme nt (MFD) 1996. Fisheries 
statistics (unpublished). 12 pp. 
Menz, A. (ed) 1995. The fishery potential and produc-
t i v i t y  o f  t h e  p e l a g i c  z o n e  o f  L a k e  M a l a w i / N i a s s a ,  
NRI/ODA, 386 pp. 
Munthali, S.M. 1997. Dwindl ing food-fish species and 
fishers’ preference: problems of conserving Lake 
Malawi’s biodiversity. Biodiversity and Conserva-
tion 6: 253-261. 
Nsiku, E. 1999. Changes in the fisheries of Lake Ma-
lawi, 1976-1996: Ecosystem-based analysis. M.Sc. 
thesis. University of Brit ish Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada. 217 pp. 
Nyambose, J. 1996. Preserving the future of Lake Ma-
lawi. Afrian Technology Forum. MIT 6 p. (accessi-
ble on website http://web.mit.edu/ african-
tech/www/articlesLake-Malawi.html).  
Patterson, G. and O. Kachinjika 1995. Limnology and 
phytoplankton ecology. Page s 1-67 in A. Menz (ed.) 
The fishery potential and productivity of the pelagic 
zone of Lake Malawi/Niassa. NRI/ODA. 386 pp. 
Patterson, G., M.J. Wooster and C.B. Sear 1995. Real-
time monitoring of African aquatic resources using 
remote sensing: with special reference to Lake Ma-
lawi. Chatham, UK: Natural Resources Institute. 21 
pp.  
Pauly, D., V. Christensen, J.  Dalsgaard, R. Froese and 
F. Torres 1998. Fishing down marine foodwebs. 
Science 279: 860-863.  
Pitcher, T.J. 1994. Results: impact of species changes 
on fisheries in Lake Mala wi. Pages 81-84 tn T.J. 
Pitcher (ed) The impact of species changes in the 
African lakes. Report to the Overseas Development 
Administration, London, UK. 213 pp. 
Potts, R. 1999. Executive summary of the workshop re-
port on an NSF/ICDP workshop on scientific drill-
ing on Lakes Malawi and Tanganyika [The Lake 
Malawi drilling project] October 10-16, 1999 Club 
Makakola, on the southwestern lakeshore of Lake 
Malawi. National Museum of Natural History, 
Smithsonian Institution, Washington (accessible on 
website http://malawidrilling.syr.edu
/report2. 
html). 
Ribbink, A. J. 1991. Distribution and ecology of the 
cichlids of the African Grea t Lakes. Pages 36-59. in 
M.H.A. Keenleyside (ed.) Cichlid fishes: Behaviour, 
ecology and evolution. Ch apman & Hall. Fish and 
Fisheries Series 2. 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 67 
Scholz, U.F., F.J. Njaya, S. Chimatiro, M. Hummel, S. 
Donda and B.J. Mkoko 1997. Status and prospects 
of participatory fisherie s management programmes 
in Malawi: A paper presented at the FAO/ODA ex-
pert consultation on inland fisheries enhancements, 
Dhaka, Bangladesh, 7-11 April, 1997. 12 pp. 
Snoeks, J. (ed.) 2000. Repo rt on systematics and tax-
onomy: SADC/GEF Lake  Malawi/Nyasa/Niassa 
Biodiversity Conservation Project. Tervuren, Bel-
gium [Chapter 1, p. 1-14 of modified report from the 
editor]. 
Thompson, A.B. 1995. Eggs and larvae of Engrauli-
cypris sardella, p. 179-199. In A. Menz (ed.) The 
fishery potential and prod uctivity of the pelagic 
zone of Lake Malawi/Niassa, NRI/ODA. 386 pp. 
Thompson, A.B., E.H. Allison and B.P. Ngatunga. 1995. 
Spatial and temporal distribution of fish in the pe-
lagic waters, p. 201-232. In  A. Menz (ed.) The fish-
ery potential and productivity of the pelagic zone of 
Lake Malawi/Niassa, NRI/ODA. 386 pp. 
Turner, J. L. 1977. Some effe cts of demersal trawling in 
Lake Malawi (Lake Nyasa) from 1968 to 1974. J. 
Fish. Biol. 10: 261-271. 
Turner, G. F. 1995. Management, conservation and 
species changes of exploited fish stocks in Lake Ma-
lawi, Pages 335-395 in T.J.  Pitcher and P.J.B. Hart 
(eds.) The impact of species changes in African 
Lakes. Chapman and Hall. Fish and Fisheries Series 
18. 
Turner, G. F., D. Tweddl e and R. Makwinja. 1995. 
Changes in demersal cichlid communities as a re-
s u l t  o f  t r a w l i n g  i n  s o u t h e r n  L a k e  M a l a w i ,  p .  3 9 7 -
412. In T.J. Pitcher and P.J.B. Hart (eds.) The im-
pact of species changes in  African Lakes. Chapman 
and Hall. Fish and Fisheries Series 18.
 
Turner, G. F. 1996. Offshore  cichlids of Lake Malawi. 
Cichlid Press. Lauenau. 240 pp. 
Tweddle, D. and J. H. Ma gasa 1989. Assessment of 
multispecies cichlid fisheries of the southeast arm 
of Lake Malawi, Africa. J. Cons. int. Explor. Mer 45: 
209-222. 
Tweddle, D, S.B. Alimoso and G. Sodzapanja 1994. 
Analysis of catch and effort data for the fisheries of 
the South East Arm of Lake Malawi, 1976-1989 with 
a discussion on earlier data and inter-relationships 
with commercial fisheries. Malawi Fisheries De-
partment, Fisheries Bulletin No. 13. 34 pp.  
Walters, C., V. Christense n and D. Pauly 1997. Struc-
turing dynamic models of exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balance. Reviews in Fish Biology 
and Fisheries 7: 1139-1172. 
WWF 1999. Lake Malawi national park, Malawi. Inter-
national Reports. 1 pp (accessible on website 
http://www.panda.org).
 
Yamaoka, K. 1991. Feeding re lationships, p. 151-172. In 
M.H.A. Keenleyside (ed.) Cichlid fishes: Behaviour, 
ecology and evolution. Ch apman & Hall. Fish and 
Fisheries Series 2. 
 
 
 
Page 68, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
The use of Ecosim to investigate 
multispecies harvesting strategies 
for capture fisheries of the  
Newfoundland-Labrador shelf 
 
Marcelo Vasconcellos
1
, Johanna Heymans
1
 
and Alida Bundy
2
 
1Fisheries Centre, UBC 
2 Bedford Institute of Ocenaography, Darmouth, 
Nova Scotia 
 
Abstract
 
 
This paper evaluates the policy optimization routine of 
Ecopath/Ecosim using as case study the model of the 
Newfoundland-Labrador shelf for the period 1985-
1987. The routine is used to calculate the best combina-
tion of harvesting strategies for multiple fleets and to il-
lustrate the type of tradeoffs expected when fisheries 
management aims at maximi zing economic, social and 
ecological goals. To maximize social and economic re-
turns from the fishery the optimization routine drives 
the ecosystem to a very simplified state where high tro-
phic level species are depleted and low trophic level 
species have a net increase in  biomass after 20 years of 
simulation. To maximize ecol ogical stability the model 
predicts in almost all cases a substantial decrease in all 
fishing fleets. The performance of calculated optimal 
harvesting strategies are generally affected by increas-
ing errors in stock assessment procedures. More realis-
tic analysis of future fisheries management policies for 
the Newfoundland-Labrador shelf will require more 
accurate data for prices per species, fleet operational 
costs, employment indicators for each fishery, and also 
ecological parameters that better represent the current 
status of the ecosystem 
 
Introduction 
 
The objective of this paper is to evaluate the use 
of Ecosim, a quantitative ecosystem model struc-
tured from Ecopath mass-balance assessment, in 
the analysis of the ecological and socio-economic 
impacts of hypothetical fisheries strategies for the 
Newfoundland-Labrador shelf marine ecosystem.  
A mass balance model of the Newfoundland-
Labrador shelf for the period 1985-1987 ( Fig. 1; 
Bundy et al., 2000) was used in the simulation of 
the impact of fisheries strategies.  The model  
represents the main functional groups, trophic 
flows and fisheries in the Northwest Atlantic 
Fisheries Organization (NAFO) areas 2J3KL and 
3NO, corresponding to the regions of the Labra-
dor shelf, the Northeast Newfoundland shelf and 
the Grand Bank, from the coast to the 1,000 m 
isobath. A total of 31 functional groups are repre-
sented in the model, including phyto- and zoo-
plankton, benthic organism s, invertebrate stocks, 
pelagic and demersal fish  stocks, seabirds, seals 
and whales.  Also, three species of fish, Northern 
cod, Greenland halibut and American plaice were 
divided into adult and juvenile pools to account 
for ontogenic differences in diets. The largest and 
most important fish stock in the region was the 
Northern cod.  The model represents a period of 
relatively constant abundance of the main com-
mercially harvested groundfish stocks, prior to 
the collapse of the Northern cod stock. Five main 
fleet types are represented in the model (Table 1): 
inshore trawlers, offshore  trawlers directed to 
cod, American plaice and other groundfish spe-
cies, mixed gear (including seine nets, gillnets 
and lines), foreign trawlers, and fleets targeting 
seals and seabirds.
 
 
The analysis aimed at using the policy optimiza-
tion routine in Ecosim to define i) the best com-
bination of harvesting strategies (relative fishing 
effort) according to differe nt goal functions, and 
ii) to calculate the expected or achievable per-
formance when errors in  stock assessment proce-
dures over time are accounted for (closed loop 
scenario). 
 
Table 1: Catches and trophic level of the species caught by 5 fleet types of the Newfoundland-Labrador shelf region 
represented in the model. TL = Trophic level. 
 
Harvested groups 
 
TL 
Inshore 
trawlers 
Offshore 
trawlers 
 
Mixed gears 
Foreign 
trawlers 
Sealing and 
seabirds 
 
Total 
Greenland halibut>40cm 4.5 0.004 0.017 0.016 0.037
Harp Seals 4.4  0.001 0.001 
Greenland halibut<=40cm 4.3 0.001  0.001 
Seabirds 4.2  0.001 0.001 
Cod > 35cm 4.2 0.014 0.257 0.164 0.150  0.585
Large pelagic feeders 4.2 0.002 0.003  0.005 
Piscivore small pelagic fish 4.1 0.015 0.001  0.016 
Skates 4.0 0.030  0.030 
American plaice<=35cm 3.7 0.004 0.016  0.020
Redfish 3.7 0.001 0.042 0.001 0.132  0.176 
American plaice>35cm 3.6 0.003 0.059 0.009 0.029  0.100 
Large demersal feeders 3.4 0.002 0.012 0.007 0.036  0.057
Capelin 3.3 0.082 0.044  0.126
Planktivore small pelagic fish 3.3 0.019 0.001  0.020
Flounders 3.1 0.002 0.033 0.004 0.039  0.078
Large Crustacea 2. 9 0.016   0.016 
Shrimp 2. 5 0.001 0.002  0.003 
Total by fleet  0.022 0.41 3 0.336 0.499 0.002 1.272 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 69 
Methods 
 
Three performance indicators are used by the op-
timization search procedure (Christensen et al. , 
2000): 
 
Net economic value:  measured as the total landed 
value of catch minus total oper ating cost over a 20 year 
period, with a discount rate of 4%.  Operating costs 
were assigned to fixed costs (35% of total value) and ef-
fort-related costs (20% of total value) for all fleets.  
 
Employment: measured as the product of the gross 
landed value of the catch and the jobs per landed value 
ratio for each fleet, i.e. in shore trawlers (5); offshore 
trawlers (1); mixed gears (5);  foreign trawlers (0.1); 
seals and seabirds fleet (5). 
 
Ecological stability: measured by the departure (nega-
tive) of species biomasses over time from target bio-
mass levels specified for each functional group.  Eco-
logical stability attempts to capture the importance of 
each species/group to the ov erall ‘health’ of the ecosys-
tem, as defined by manage rs. During simulations we 
assumed that whales, seals, seabirds and cod are im-
portant for managers and that it is their goal to rebuild 
the biomass of these groups to 3 times the baseline 
Ecopath value. Additionally, we tested species weight-
ings proportional to the inve rse of the P/B ratio, which 
provided simil qualitative results.  
 
By assigning weights to each of the three indica-
tors it was then possible to define different man-
agement goals and strategies (Table 2) ( and see 
Cochrane this volume ). Besides the three man-
agement goals in Table 2, we examined how poli-
cies would change in response to increasing 
weights to ecological stability, starting from an 
equal weight scenario (1 to economic, 1 to em-
ployment, and 1 to ecological stability).
  
 
Simulations were run under two trophic control 
scenarios, expressed by the value of the prey vul-
nerability parameter: v=0.4 and v= 0.6. 
 
During simulations adult and juvenile Greenland 
halibut presented alternated cycles in abundance 
that forced us to adjust feeding time to increase 
model stability (ca. 13% of the diet of adult hali-
but is made of juvenile halibut). Feeding time fac-
tor of adult and juvenile Greenland halibut was 
thus set to 0, thus feeding time and hence the 
time exposed to predation is forced to remain 
constant, and less dependent on changes in prey 
availability. 
Table 2. Management goals and performance indica-
tors used in the optimization procedure.  
 
 Weights for performance indicators 
Management 
goal 
Net eco-
nomic value 
Employment Ecological 
stability 
Maximize net 
economic value 1.000 0.0001 0.0001 
Maximize em-
ployment 0.0001 1.000 0.0001 
Maximize eco-
logical stability 0.0001 0.0001 1.000 
Figure 1.  Trophic model of the Newfoundland-Labrador shelf area during the 1985-1987 period (Bundy et al., 2000). 
Page 70, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Simulation results 
 
Table 3 shows the results of the policy optimiza-
tion for three contrasting management goals.  In 
order to meet the economic goal of maximizing 
the net economic return taken from the system 
the model calculates a reduction in inshore and 
offshore trawlers and an increase in mixed gears, 
foreign trawlers and the harvesting of seals and 
sea birds. In this scenario the best solution seems 
to be to increase the relative fishing effort of the 
fleets with highest yields (mixed gears and foreign 
trawlers), which also target low trophic level spe-
cies (Table 1), and to deplete the top predators in 
the system (seals and birds), which are competi-
tors to fisheries. 
 
To meet the social goal of maximizing employ-
ment the optimal policy involves an increase in all 
fishing fleets, particularly mixed gears that have a 
higher jobs/landings rati o. To maximize ecologi-
cal stability the model predicts in almost all cases 
a substantial decrease in all fishing fleets. Predic-
tions of optimal fishing rates and performance 
values are sensitive to the value of the vulnerabil-
ity parameter, although the general qualitative 
pattern of predictions is similar under both tro-
phic control scenarios. Figure 2 shows the result-
ing changes in species biomass under optimal 
policies for each management goal. In order to 
maximize economic return and employment 
(measured as a variable dependent on landings) 
the hypothetical manager drives the system to a 
very simplified state where high trophic level spe-
cies are depleted and low trophic level species 
have a net increase in biomass.  There are two ap-
parent factors contributing to increasing land-
ings; firstly the increase in fishing pressure on the 
groundfish stocks (some of them completely col-
lapsed after 20 years); and secondly, the increase 
in biomass and hence the productivity of lower 
trophic level species also targeted by fisheries 
(e.g. shrimps, capelin, planktivorous fish). A more 
balanced distribution of biomass across the food 
web is obtained when the goal 
is to maximize ecological stabil-
ity. 
 
Releasing fishing pressure 
leads to a system that presents 
at the end of the simulation 
similar characteristics encoun-
tered at the starting condition. 
 
Figure 3 compares policy per-
formance with increasing 
weight given to ecological sta-
bility.  Relatively small changes 
in policy performance occur up 
to a 1:1:10 weighting to eco-
nomic, social and ecological goals, respectively, 
which is achieved with the following relative fish-
ing rates (Table 4): 
 
Increasing the weight for ecological stability even 
more leads to more drastic changes in the three 
performance indicators, as  w e l l  a s  i n  t h e  c a l c u -
lated optimal fishing rates (Table 5). 
This example is illustrative of the type of tradeoffs 
encountered when managers aim at balancing 
ecological and socio-economic goals. Using the 
simple goal functions specified above, the model 
predicts that improvements in ecological per-
formance will occur at the expense of substantial 
losses in socio-economic performance (Figure 3). 
Interestingly, the optimal policy calculated by the 
model in the latter scenario is the one that closes 
fisheries with low jobs/catch ratio (offshore and 
foreign trawlers) and also the direct harvesting of 
charismatic fauna. 
 
The effect of the lack of perfect information about 
stock sizes and the actual fishing mortality on the 
performance of policies were also considered in 
the simulations.  Ecosim evaluates the perform-
ance of fishing strategies in a closed loop scheme 
where managers have to rely on stock assessment 
to determine the annual optimal policies.  
 
Typically, errors in stock assessment cause vari-
Table 3. Performance indicators of optimal policies (relative Fs) under two 
trophic control (= vulnerability) scenarios (v=0.4 and 0.6). 
 V=0.4 V=0.6 
 
Goal 
Eco-
nomic 
 
Social 
Ecologi-
cal 
Eco-
nomic 
 
Social 
Ecologi-
cal 
Performance 
Net economic value 155.4 87.4 8.8 292.2 240.6 42.1 
Employment 1027.1 1101.8 17 .5 1562.6 1782.2 24.6 
Ecological stability -709.0 -727.1  -420.3 -1027.3 -632.5 -407.2 
Overall 3.3 10.7 -1.2 6.2 17.2 -1.1 
Optimal Fs by fleet 
Inshore trawlers 0.4 2.8 0.5 1.1 7.3 0.6 
Offshore trawlers 0.1 20.1 0.1 0.0 21.1 0.2 
Mixed gears 20.1 76.8 0.1 274.0 20.4 0.2 
Foreign trawlers 6.9 10.2 0.1 24.9 3.8 4.6 
Sealing, birds 6.6 13.1 0.1 0.1 3.9 0.1 
Table 4. Relative fishing rates. 
Inshore trawlers 2.3 
Offshore trawlers 0.0 
Mixed gears 2.0 
Foreign trawlers 0.0 
Seals and seabirds 0.0 
Table 5. Optimal fishing rates. 
Inshore trawlers 8.6 
Offshore trawlers 0.3 
Mixed gears 20.5 
Foreign trawlers 10.8 
Seals and seabirds 0.8 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 71 
ability in the implemented fishing rates and hence 
affect the performance of fishing strategies. In the 
example below the performance of a policy that 
optimizes the balance among economic, social 
and ecological goals is evaluated under three lev-
els of observation errors (Table 6: coefficient of 
variation of the stock assessment procedure). 
 
We found that there is a general decrease of per-
formance for economic, social and overall indica-
tors, but a slight improvement in ecological per-
formance with increasing error, meaning that the 
variability imposed by stock assessment error is 
predicted to actually attenuate the impact of fish-
ing on ecological stability.  In all cases we tested, 
ecological stability either improved or remained 
relatively unchanged with increasing assessment 
Table 6. Coefficient of variation of the stock as-
sessment procedure 
 CV=0 CV=0.2 CV=0.5 
Economic 150.3 121.6 111.9 
Social 1058.5 780.7 702 
Ecological -677.9 -662.6 -657.3 
Overall 11.5 8.28 7.33 
economic goal
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Hoo
ded Sea
ls
G.halib
ut>40
cm
Harp Seals
G.halibut<
=40cmWhalesSeabirds
Cod
 > 35cm
L.Pel.Feeders
Pisc. SPF
Ska
tes
Cod <= 
35 cm
Aplaice<=
35cmRedfish
Apla
ice>
35cm
Arctic c
od
L.Dem.Feeders
Cape
lin
Plankt. SP
F
Sand lan
ce
Flound
ers
S.Dem.Feed
ers
Larg
e Crustacea
Shrimp
Bend /Bstart
social goal
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Ho
oded Seals
G.halibut>4
0cm
Harp Se
als
G.hali
but<=4
0cm
Whal
es
Seabirds
Co
d > 35cm
L.Pe
l.Feeders
Pisc.
 SPF
Ska
tes
Cod <= 35 cmAp
laice<=3
5cm
Redfish
Apl
aice>35
cm
Arctic co
d
L.Dem.
Feeders Capelin
Plankt. SPFSa
nd lance
Flounders
S.D
em.F
eeders
Large Cru
sta
cea
Shri
mp
Bend /Bstart
ecological goal
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
Ho
oded Sea
ls
G.halibut>4
0cm
Ha
rp Sea
ls
G.halibut<=40
cm
WhalesSe
abirds
Cod >
 35cm
L.Pel
.Feede
rs
Pisc.
 SPF
Skates
Cod <=
 35 cm
Aplaice<=35cm
Redfish
Ap
laice>35cm
Arctic cod
L.Dem.Feeders
Capelin
Plankt. SPF
Sa
nd lance
Flounders
S.De
m.Fe
eders
Large Crustace
a
Shrimp
Bend /Bstart
Figure 2. Predicted changes in biomass of functional groups  of Newfoundland-Labrador shelf model as a result 
of fishing rates that optimize economic, social and ecolog ical goal functions.  Bend/Bstart is the ratio between 
biomass at the start of the simulation and at the end of 20 years period under the same  fishing rate.  Results are 
presented for 23 groups placed in order of decreasing trophic level from left to right. 
Page 72, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
errors. 
 
Conclusion 
 
The analysis presented 
above was not meant to 
provide a realistic policy 
evaluation for the model 
area.  Instead the goal 
was to test the overall be-
havior of the model un-
der different parameter 
settings, and to check the 
consistency of the results 
according to the different 
policy scenarios.  A more 
realistic analysis should 
include better economic 
data (prices per species, 
fleet operational costs), 
better social indicators 
(such as employment for 
each fishery) and also 
ecological parameters that better represent the 
current status of the system and its ecosystem 
dynamics. Of particular importance are the vul-
nerability parameters among species, which 
seems to influence the magnitude of performance 
values and optimal fishing rates.  When running 
the policy optimization routine attention should 
also be given to long term changes in productiv-
ity, or oceanic regimes, which might influence the 
overall performance of policy options considera-
bly.
 
 
References 
 
Bundy, A., Lilly, G. R. and P. A. Shelton 2000. A mass 
balance model of the Newfoundland-Labrador 
shelf. Canadian Technical Report of Fisheries and 
Aquatic Sciences. 
Christensen, V., C.J. Walter s, and D. Pauly 2000. Eco-
path with Ecosim Version 4: Help System. Univer-
sityof British Columbia, Fisheries Centre, Vancou-
ver, Canada and ICLARM, Penang, Malaysia
 
 
 
-800
-600
-400
-200
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1 5 10 20 30
Ecological weight
Performance
econ
socio
ecol
Figure 3.  Changes in policy performance with increasing weight given to ecological 
stability.  The x axis represents the weig ht given to ecological stability when eco-
nomic and social weights are kept constant at 1. 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 73 
Simulating management options  
for the North Sea in the 1880s 
 
 
Steven Mackinson 
CEFAS, Lowestoft, UK 
 
Abstract 
 
An Ecopath model of the North Sea in the 1880s, is 
used here in evaluating the utility of the Ecosim policy 
simulation routine. The model representation of the 
North Sea in the 1880s was 're-constructed' by combin-
ing present information on trophic linkages of North 
Sea species with historical scientific and local knowl-
edge. The model captures the period when sailing ves-
sels still predominated and industrialised fishing was 
on the cusp of explosive development. Evaluation of 
Ecosim policy simulation routines focussed on sensitiv-
ity analysis in relation to: (i) initialisation options of 
optimisation routines, (ii) the effect of the user input 
vulnerability flow rate parameter, v, (iii) parameter set-
tings for the 'closed-loop' an alysis of management er-
rors. By providing users with tools to examine various 
policy options and objectiv ely comparing them using 
criteria scores, the policy evaluation options contribute 
great utility to the Ecopath with Ecosim software. 
However, it is important to re-iterate that users should 
not interpret criteria scores  as providing direction for 
management advice; results of simulations depend 
heavily on specific paramete r settings used. In particu-
lar, simulations are very sensitive to the user input vul-
nerability flow rate. Specific 
noteworthy points/ issues 
arising from the simulations 
are commented on. 
 
 
Introduction:  
Ecopath Model of The 
North Sea in  
the 1880’s 
 
Prior to the development 
of steam fishing vessels in 
the early 1880s, more than 
30,000 sailing fishing ves-
sels, from bordering coun-
tries, ploughed  the  boun-
tiful  waters  of  the  North 
S e a .  I n  t h e   U K   a l o n e ,   
fishing  and  its  associated 
activities provided a liveli-
hood for upwards of 
100,000 people. The 
North Sea was particularly 
rich in marine life, both in 
general and in individual 
populations. Outstripping 
all in economic and socio-
logical significance, how-
ever, was one fish; the herring (Fig. 1). Herring 
drifters and beam trawling sailing smacks (Fig. 2) 
dominated the seas with other small vessels en-
gaging in hook and line fishing and crab and lob-
sters in coastal waters. Trawl fish were classified 
under the names ‘prime’ and ‘offal’; the former 
including turbot, brill, soles, and Doreys; the lat-
ter comprising plaice, co d, haddocks, gurnards, 
skate, and “other such kinds as are occasionally 
caught in the trawl” (Holdsworth 1874) (Fig 3). 
Combining present information on trophic link-
ages of North Sea species wi th historical scientific 
and local knowledge, an ecosystem model is re-
constructed to describe the state of the North Sea 
ecosystem in the 1880s (Mackinson 2000). The 
model is ‘re-constructed’ with the aid of a previ-
ous model describing the state of the ecosystem in 
1980s (Christensen 1995). 
 
Simulation settings 
 
The 1880’s North Sea model consists of 44 groups 
and 5 fisheries. Trawl and line fisheries are com-
bined in to one group since they catch the same 
species and no information was readily available 
to otherwise separate them. Settings used  during 
simulations of various  management policy op-
tions examined below are detailed in Appendix 1 
(Tables i, ii and iii) and made reference to in the 
text. 
0
100,000
200,000
300,000
400,000
500,000
1808 1818 1828 1838 1848 1858 1868 1878 1888 1898
tonnes
Holland
Scotland
England
Germany
Belgium
Denmark
France
Norway
TOTAL ESTIMATED HERRING CATCH
Figure 1. Catch of North Sea herring. The apparent sharp dip in catches from the late 1870s 
to mid 1880s is not real, but due to missing catch statistics for the Scottish fleet during that 
period. 
Page 74, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
 
Effect of initialisation options on estimates of 
relative fishing mortality derived from a search 
procedure used to define an optimum harvest 
strategy in terms of fishing mortality for each 
gear type 
 
Prior to examining the influence of alternative 
weightings on the economic, social and ecological 
importance of management policy options, it was 
essential to explore the effect of the three initiali-
sation options on the results of the optimum har-
vest strategy search procedure (conjugate gradi-
ent method).  
 
The options for search initialisation were consid-
ered individually and combined. Those compared 
were: 
 
1. Start at Ecopath base values (EB) 
2. Random start (R) 
3. Start from Ecopath base and restart using Current 
values (EB+C) 
4. Random start and restart using current values 
(R+C) 
 
For each of the initialisation settings, the search 
procedure was allowed to run three times. The 
stability of the relative F estimates was compared 
between runs and between initialisation options 
(Fig 4). 
 
Searches starting from Ecopath base (EB) ob-
tained the same consistent relative F values. 
However, these were considerably different from 
all other remaining search es. The random search 
method and combined EB+C and R+C initialisa-
tions derived relative fishing mortality estimates 
in approximately the same ratios for the 5 gear 
types, although neither consistent nor stable rela-
tive F values were derived within or between ini-
tialisation options. 
 
Based on these results, for consistency, the strat-
e g y  u s e d   i n   a l l   s u b s e q u e n t   s i m u l a t i o n s   o f  a l -
ternative policy options was to run the search 
procedure starting at Ecopath base F values, al-
lowing the procedure to run for at least 2 times 
the number of gear types, then to re-run the 
search starting from current F values. Unless any 
relative F values estimates were greater than 20 
times the initial F (a constraint within the search 
procedure indicating that such values are non-
Figure 2. Yarmouth Lugger drift net fishing for her-
ring at night (top), and trawling smack towing the 
trawl (Holdsworth 1874) 
 
Figure 3. North Sea catches of cod, haddock, soles, 
brill, salmon, sturgeon, mackerel and turbot and 
plaice from 1850 to 1902. 
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
4,500
1850 1860 1870 1880 1890 1900
tonnes
Brill Turbot
Soles Mackerel
Salmon Sturgeon
0
50,000
100,000
150,000
200,000
250,000
1865 1870 1875 1880 1885 1890 1895 1900 1905
tonnes
Cod
Plaice
Haddock
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 75 
sense), the relative F estimates were used in 
simulations. For the cases where estimated F’s 
exceeded 20 times initial F, the search procedure 
was run again with a random start and re-run us-
ing current F’s.  
 
Influence of flow control parameter 
 
The flow control (= vulnerabilty) parameter 
specifies the flow between invulnerable and vul-
nerable prey, and from prey to predator. Higher 
values of flow rapidly replenish the vulnerable 
prey pool from the invulnerable pool, indicating 
that food is not limiting and thus representing 
more ‘top down’ control.  Lower values (e.g. 0.2) 
represent low flow of food, thus representing a 
‘bottom up’ control effect on the predator-prey in-
teractions. Intermediate values (e.g. 0.5) repre-
sent mixed control. The flow control thus has im-
portant consequences to the dynamics of the in-
teractions in the model and simulations must be 
compared under various settings. Whilst there are 
several methods implemented in Ecosim to derive 
values of flow control between various groups, the 
present analysis simply compares 3 values of the 
parameter, each applied as a ‘blanket’ setting for 
all groups in the 
model. 
 
The effect of flow con-
trol on the estimation 
of F during the search 
procedure was com-
pared for 4 policy 
scenarios (see next 
section for details of 
scenarios). Values of 
flow control above 0.6 
generally produced 
unstable dynamics of 
the model. From Fig-
ure 5 it appears there 
are no apparent 
trends in the effect of 
flow control on the 
estimation of opti-
mum F. In the eco-
nomic maximisation 
scenario, lower flow 
control results in 
higher estimates of F 
for most gears, sug-
gesting that fished groups are more resilient at 
low flow control. However, this observation does 
not hold true for ‘other’ gear, nor across alterna-
tive policy scenarios. The effect of the flow control 
on the resilience of a group to fishing is unclear 
and rather confusing. It appears to fluctuate de-
pending on what group is being fished, and the 
assumptions of the policy being considered.  
 
I have doubt as to whether or not the lack of ‘pat-
tern’ in response to chan ges in flow control is a 
result of differences in the fishing mortality esti-
mates derived from the search procedure. My 
conclusion is one of caution; once a particular 
policy has been chosen, the response to changes 
in the assumptions of flow control should be 
thoroughly examined. However, it still remains 
unclear to me how changes in the flow control ef-
fect the response of each group to fishing, since 
fishing mortality is not directly linked with the 
flow control parameter. 
 
Comparison of setting all flow control to v=0.4 
with prey vulnerabilities assumed to be propor-
tional to trophic level 
Table 2. Weighting assigned to each value component under 4 policy scenarios 
 Value weight for each scenario 
Value Component 1. Economic 
maximisation 
2. Social 
maximisation 
3. Ecological 
maximisation 
4. ‘Big compro-
mise’ 
Net economic value 1 0.00001 0.00001 1 
Social (employment) value 0.00001 1 0.00001 1 
Ecosystem stability 0.00001 0.00001 1 1 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
EB1 EB2 EB3 R1 R2 R3 EB+C1 EB+C2 EB+C3 R+C1 R+C2 R+C3
Search method
Relative fishing mortality
Drifters
Trawlers and liners
Others
Pots
Seal killing
Figure 4. Comparison of stability of F estimates from search procedures
Page 76, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Despite those vulnerabilities weighted in propor-
tion to trophic level being quite close to 0.4 for 
many fish groups (Appendix 1, Table iii), there 
was apparently a considerable impact on the es-
timated relative fishing mortalities (Table 1).  The 
search procedure was run several times to ensure 
similar estimated relative F values were consis-
tently obtained. Despite  this obvious difference, 
closer examination of the simulation results re-
vealed that the impact on the system within 20 
years was similar for both fishing strategies.  With 
the exception of seals and salmon & seatrout, the 
same groups were affected in similar ways (Fig 6). 
Total system biomass was 1% higher and value 5% 
higher with v proportional to trophic level than 
when flow value of v=0.4 is assumed for all 
groups. 
 
Results: individual policy simulations 
 
Tables 2 and 3 below display the policy scenario 
weightings and the final optimised relative F val-
ues for the various gear types under each sce-
nario. Flow parameter setting was v= 0.4 for all 
simulations compared here. 
 
Scenario 1: Economic Maximisation 
 
The optimum fishing strategy derived to maxi-
mise value of harvest had two main elements. 
Table 3. Optimum relative optimum F values for each gear type according to each policy scenario 
 Relative F (to initial value) 
 1. Economic 2. Social 3. Ecolo gical 4. ‘Bi g compromise’ 
Drifters 7.9 9.8 0.6 9.2 
Trawlers and liners 7.1 9.7 0.4 7.3 
Others 2.1 3. 7 0.8 2.8 
Pots 1 5.1 0.5 1.3
Seal killing 0.1 0.1 1.8 0. 9 
(a) Economic maximimum
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Flow =0.6 Flow =0.4 Flow =0.2
Reative Fishing mortality
Drif ters Traw lers and liners
Others Pots
Seal killing
(b) Social maximum
0
5
10
15
20
25
Flow =0.6 Flow =0.4 Flow =0.2
Reative Fishing mortality
Drif ters Traw lers and liners
Others Pots
Seal killing
(c) Ecological maximimum
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Flow =0.6 Flow =0.4 Flow =0.2
Reative Fishing mortality
Drif ters Traw lers and liners
Others Pots
Seal killing
(d) Big compromise
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Flow =0.6 Flow =0.4 Flow =0.2
Reative Fishing mortality
Drif ters Traw lers and liners
Others Pots
Seal killing
 
 
Figure 5. Comparison of fishing mortality estimates under 3 flow control assumptions. 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 77 
First was to increase the harvest pressure for both 
the high valued ‘prime’ fish (via trawl gear) and 
on the lower value, higher volume, herring (via 
Drifter fleet). The low initial fishing moralities 
were increased approximately seven fold in each 
case. The second element comprised a 2 times in-
crease in F for ‘other’ gear (acting on bluefin tuna, 
saithe, salmon & seatrout, mackerel, and sprat) 
which resulted in the main predators herring and 
‘prime fish’ being reduced, thus alleviating the 
predation pressure on them. Ironically, salmon & 
seatrout ended up benefiting from the increased 
fishing pressure (on themselves from the ‘other’ 
gear), as a result of release of euphasiid food, 
when the herring stock declined. Other ‘winners’ 
and ‘losers’, (only those whose biomass at the end 
of the run was > ±20% that at the start) are 
shown in Fig 7a. The stocks of herring and ‘prime’ 
fish were maintained throughout the period de-
spite the early heavy fish ing mortality. Total bio-
mass of all groups was 11% less at the end of the 
run than the start.  Whilst there was reduction in 
total value of the fishery by 32%, total value re-
mained 2 times that of the costs. 
 
Scenario 2: Social (Jobs) Maximisation 
 
Attempting to maximise the jobs/catch ratio of 
the combined fisheries, results in a similar har-
vest strategy to the economic maximisation pol-
icy. This is unsurprising since according to the 
distribution of average crew sizes (14 for Drifters, 
9 for trawlers, 6 for ‘others’, 3 for pots) the largest 
n u m b e r  o f  j o b s  p e r  u n i t  c a t c h  w o u l d  b e  m a d e  
available in the herring fishery, fol-
lowed by the trawl fishery. Given 
the large number of processing re-
lated jobs generated from the her-
ring fishery, the disparity is proba-
bly even larger. Ecosystem effects 
of the harvest policy are also simi-
lar, although of slightly greater 
magnitude (Fig 7b); herring and 
‘prime’ fish are initially reduced 
due to increased fishing, but this is 
to some extent mitigated by the in-
creased fishing on their main 
predators (via ‘other’ gear). After 
20 years, the total biomass of the 
system is reduced by 14%, total 
value of all fisheries has been re-
duced by 44%.
 
 
Scenario 3:Ecological Maximisa-
tion 
 
Giving all weight to ecological im-
portance results in a radically dif-
ferent harvest strategy to economic 
and social scenarios. With the ex-
ception of ‘seal killing’, fishing pressure is re-
duced on all gears under the ecological policy 
scenario. Fishing pressure on seals is increased 
because in the settings for ecological importance 
they are assigned zero importance to reflect the 
attitude towards seals as simply being pests dis-
turbing salmon fisheries. A higher importance on 
sturgeon, with an ideal target biomass 2 times 
higher than original, results in their fishing pres-
sure being reduced and consequent increase in 
biomass (Fig 7c). Over 20 years, total system 
biomass and value are 1% and 3% above the ini-
tial estimates.  
 
The results appear to be sensitive to changes in 
the assigned values of ecological importance. 
Whilst this issue was discussed at length during  
the workshop, it was not resolved. Present set-
tings (Appendix 1, Table iii) are entirely subjective 
and simply reflect the users ‘preferences’ for cer-
tain groups.  
 
In effect, the importance reflects a desirability 
factor. Whether or not this bears any resemblance 
Table 4. Estimated fishing mortalities derived under 
different assumptions on ecological importance. 
Relative F (to initial value) 
Subjective weight 1/(P/B) weight 
Drifters 0.6 0.8 
Trawlers and liners 0.4 0.4 
Others 0.8 1.2 
Pots 0.5 1 
Seal killing 1.8 1 
Figure 6. Comparison of effects of blanket settings for flow control pa-
rameter (v=0.4) and weighting of flow para meter proportional to trophic 
level (determined according to  phytoplankton TL=1 with v=0.1, see Ap-
pendix 1, Table iii. 
0
1
2
Seals
Rays and Skates
Juv. rays and
skates
Bluefin tuna
Saithe
N.sea mackerel
W. mackerel
Haddock
Herring
Plaic e
Halibut and turbot
Salmon and
seatrout
Biomass End/Start ratio
v prop to TL
v=0.4
Page 78, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
to a measure of ‘ecological stability’ is in question. 
Also questionable is whether ‘ecological stability’ 
is an appropriate goal, since ecosystems are under 
constant change.  For myself, a goal of stability 
conjures up the argument between Conservation 
vs. Preservation. From a semantics point of view, 
I prefer the term ecosystem integrity, even though 
we are left with no better way to measure it. 
 
Furthermore, the issue of ecological importance is 
not easily resolved since its interpretation 
changes from place to place and with changing at-
titudes. For example, seals were once considered 
pests, but more recently are valued as indicators 
of ecosystem health. At present, the only ‘rule’ 
that users should perhaps adopt regarding as-
sumptions relating to ecological importance, is to 
ensure that they are explicit about the settings 
chosen; the rationale and the consequences (sen-
sitivity to) their choices.  
 
Comparison is made (Table 4) with the subjective 
settings vs. ecological importance defined as 
1/(P/B) (meaning that larger slowing growing 
species are given higher importance) suggested 
during the workshop (see Appendix 1, Table iii). 
(a) Economic maximisation
0
1
2
Rays and Skates
Juv. rays and skates
Bluefin tuna
N.sea mackerel
W. mackerel
Haddock
Herring
Plaic e
Halibut and turbot
Salmon and seatrout
Edible crabs and lobsters
Biomass End/Start ratio
(b) Social maximisation
0
1
2
Seals
Rays and Skates
Juv. rays and skates
Bluefin tuna
Saithe
N.sea mackerel
W. mackerel
Haddock
Herring
Plaic e
Halibut and turbot
Salmon and seatrout
Edible crabs and lobsters
Biomass End/Start ratio
(c) Ecological maximis ation
0
1
2
3
Seals
Sturgeon
Biomass End/Start ratio
(d) Big compromise
0
1
2
Rays and Skates
Juv. rays and skates
Bluefin tuna
Saithe
N.sea mackerel
W. mackerel
Haddock
Herring
Plaic e
Halibut and turbot
Salmon and seatrout
Biomass End/Start ratio
 
Figure 7. Winners (dots) and losers (open circles) from each policy scenario. Note that only those groups whose bio-
mass changed ±20% from are displayed 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 79 
There were no large unexpected 
differences in the fishing strat-
egy when ecological importance 
was defined as 1/(P/B). How-
ever, on re-running the search 
procedure on the original sub-
jective weight scenario, alterna-
tive F estimates of 0.9, 0.4, 1.1, 
0.9, 0.8 were obtained. It is 
thus concluded that little can be 
said with confidence on the effects of changes in 
the assumption on ecological importance settings 
since the variation result ing from different F es-
timates from search procedure are greater than 
the differences between the assumptions on eco-
logical importance 
 
One noticeable difference relating to different as-
sumptions on ecological importance was the open 
loop scoring value for ecological stability. Under 
the subjective weighting the value was –142, 
whilst under the 1/(P/B) weighting it was –1264. 
It is not clear how this result occurs but it is pre-
sumed to be related to the combination of the 
higher importance weight and lower fishing pres-
sure assigned to seals. 
 
Scenario 4: The ‘Big Compromise’ 
 
Once again, the big compromise policy scenario 
came up with a fishing strategy (and consequent 
effects on species) similar in pattern to the eco-
nomic and social scenarios (Fig 7d). Although 
fishing pressure is increased on herring and 
‘prime’ species, concurrent fishing on their preda-
tors mitigates the fishing effects. In fact, some of 
the prime species showed small increases in 
abundance over the period. Total system biomass 
declines by 11% and value by 35%. 
 
Comparisons between policies 
 
The overviews of system responses given above 
show some consistency in the general prediction 
of a harvest strategy that targets predators of high 
value (economic or social) species, so as to relieve 
them from predation and allow increased fishing 
mortality. It emphasises clearly a competition be-
tween fisheries and natural predators both ex-
ploiting a common resource.  
 
Since jobs and value are closely related it is no 
surprise that the economic and social scenarios 
are similar. The ecological scenario is in stark  
contrast to the others and is the only scenario that 
manages to achieve a higher biomass and value of 
the fishery over the 20 simulation period. Results 
from the big compromise are more closely aligned 
with the economic and social values. The trade-
offs between policy weightings are explored fur-
ther below. Economic, social and ecosystem 
s c o r e s  f o r  e a c h  p o l i c y  ( T a b l e  5 )  r e v e a l  t h a t  w h i l e  
maximum social and ecological benefit was de-
rived under the appropriate policies, the greatest 
economic benefit was not predicted under the 
economic scenario. The reason for this is not 
known, but may be in part related to small differ-
ences resulting from the search procedure as pre-
viously discussed. The greatest overall score was 
derived from the ‘Big Compromise’, this being 6 
times that of the status quo. 
 
Trade-offs between policy options in which each 
objective is given a positive weight are explored 
for a variety of scenarios A-G (Table 6). Increas-
ing the weight on ecosystem stability (A-D) re-
sults in lowering the overall score for the policy, 
even though economic and social scores are con-
siderably increased. Curiously, the ecosystem cri-
teria score does not show any consistent direc-
Table 5. Comparison of open loop scores for each policy outputs for each sce-
nario. Shaded boxes are highest scores. 
 
Criteria Policies 
 Status Quo Economic 
max 
Social max Ecological ‘Big compro-
mise’ 
Economic 22.56 115.4 110.4 15.82 118.61 
Social 27.79 1057.06 1139.75 116.28 1109.13 
Ecosystem -0.9 -288.09 -299.2 -142 -272.69 
Overall 1.5 3.42 5.03 -0.3 7.85 
Table 6. Comparison of various policy trade-offs according to different weightings (A-G). 
POLICY A BCDE  F  G
Policy weighting tradeoffs 
Net economic value 1 1 1 1 5 5 1 
Social (employment) value 1 1 1 1 5 1 5 
Ecosystem stability 12 5 1 0  111  
F estimates 
Drifters 9.2 9 8.3 9.4 9.3 8. 9 9.3 
Trawlers and liners 7.3 7.3 7.1 6. 7 7.9 7.5 7.7
Others 2.8 1 1.6 20.1 2 7.9 21. 7 1.2
Pots 1. 3 1 0. 7 0.7 5.7 1. 7 1 
Seal killing 0. 9 0. 7 1. 3 0.6 0. 3 0. 3 0. 9 
Criteria scores 
Economic 118.61 11 4.64 116. 9 1 47.61 1 49.16 1 48.75 113.27 
Social 110 9.13 1086. 42 10 73.711 2 59.311 2 8 8 . 1 5 1268.93 10 95.99
Ecosystem -2 72.69 -2 74.08 -268. 5 -281.6 7 -2 96.62 -288. 32 -2 78.73 
Overall 7.85 7.05 5.41 4.07 49.94 27.07 26. 97 
Page 80, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
tional change when more emphasis is given to 
that policy. Policies E-G in which higher weight is 
given to economic and or social objectives score 
much higher overall than policies with ecological 
objectives. A counter-intuitive result is the higher 
score for social criteria under policy D (ecosystem 
biased) as opposed to policy G (social biased). 
Ranking most highly overall is Policy E. Its equal 
heavy weight to socio-econ omic objectives results 
in the lowest ecosystem score, but highest eco-
nomic and social scores.  
 
Though the arbitrary scores allow ranking of the 
policies they do not offer clear direction for ad-
vice, nor can they be expected to. One reason is 
because of the large inherent uncertainties in-
volved in subjective valuations of weightings of 
ecological importance for each group. A second is  
the result of variations in the estimations of opti-
mum F derived from the search procedure. Fi-
nally, it is not clear whether maximising the total 
overall score of the criteria  is indeed an appropri-
ate goal. The meaning and interpretations of the 
scores appear to be context sensitive. It necessar-
ily begs the questions as to whether a higher 
overall score is obviously better 
or just higher? 
 
One important point to note from this exercise, is 
that it seems that the results of the policy trade-
offs, in the case of this model, are least sensitive 
to changes in the weighting on ecosystem stabil-
ity. Perhaps it is more sensitive to values assigned 
to relative ecological importance and Bideal/ 
Binitial for each group?  
 
Considering the effects of management error: 
closed loop scenarios 
 
All previous results were based on the assumption 
that managers have perfect information (open 
loop simulations) and are able to implement the 
harvest strategies without error. Closed loop 
simulations, whereby a simulated manager tries 
to implement a harvest strategy, were used to ex-
amine some of the effects of potential errors on 
the implementation of harvest strategies. Those 
considered were  manageme nt errors relating to 
(i) the use of alternative assessment methods for 
predicting F and used for updating harvest tactics 
and, (ii) increases in catchability resulting from 
changes in fleet efficiency. All closed loop simula-
tion are run using the ‘Big Compromise’ policy 
scenario (i.e. equal weighting to economic, social 
and ecological stability). 
 
Comparison of uncertainty of  
assessment methods 
 
Figure 8 examines the errors associated with in-
creasing variation in the reliability of 2 assess-
ment methods. The error score for each policy 
evaluation criteria is calculated as the difference 
in the criteria score between open loop simula-
tions (manager with perfect information) and 
closed loop simulations (manager with assess-
ment errors) over a range of variation coefficients 
in the accuracy of the assessments (CV’s). The ini-
tial large errors represent the change from assum-
ing fisheries are managed with perfect informa-
tion to one where errors occur (open loop to 
closed loop simulations). The same pattern of er-
rors occurs for both assessment methods. In-
creasing uncertainty in the F estimate (increasing 
(a) Catch/Biomass estimation method
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
cv=0 cv=0.2 cv=0.4 cv=0.6 cv=0.8 cv=1
CV of Catch/Biomass estimate
Econ. Ecol. & Overall error score
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Social criteria error
Economic
E cosystem
Overall
Social
(b) D irect assessment of F  
-30
-20
-10
0
10
20
30
40
50
cv=0 cv=0.2 cv=0.4 cv=0.6 cv=0.8 cv=1
CV of direct assessment method
Econ. Ecol. & Overall error score
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
Social error score
Economic
E cosystem
Overall
Social
Figure 8. Error scores for policy evaluation criteria resultin g from changes in uncertaint y for two fishing mortality 
assessment methods. 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 81 
CV’s) results in increasing error scores. It is inter-
esting to note, that for both assessment methods, 
the error score relating to ecosystem stability is 
only slightly affected by the initial 20% increase 
in variation, and further rises result in increas-
ingly larger errors. 
 
Effects of increasing fleet efficiency 
 
The change in error scores associated with annual 
increases in catchability are most marked be-
tween zero and 0.2 and up to 0.4. (Fig 9). i.e. even 
a small change in gear efficiency has a large im-
pact on the implementation of the harvest strat-
egy. Beyond annual increases in catchability of 
0.4, the impact of changes in efficiency still occur 
but are apparently less dramatic. Being unaware 
as to what reasonable values for annual changes 
in catchability might be, I examined changes up 
to 10 fold. Even these more severe increases did 
not have such an impact as the initial increase 
from zero to 0.2. 
 
Discussion 
 
My overall impression is that the policy evalua-
tion options in Ecopath with Ecosim have con-
tributed great utility to the software. Users wish-
ing to examine various policy options can now 
compare them with a degree of objectivity by us-
ing the criteria scores, and also examine re-
sponses of specific groups within the ecosystem. 
 
However, although the evaluation criteria scores 
allow ranking of the policies they do not offer 
clear direction for advice,  nor can they be ex-
pected to, since subjective valuations to-
gether with variations resulting from tech-
nical procedures and differences in inter-
pretation compound the already complex 
results. It is likely that only local knowl-
edge of issues can help interpret what to 
do. Familiarity with the model and the 
various issues are paramount. I am sure 
that it would not be prudent to take a 
model from an unfamiliar area and suggest 
to make predictions about the ‘best’ har-
vest policies.  
 
It is unavoidable that any comparison of 
policy options will require very careful sen-
sitivity testing to the range of possible in-
put parameters used during simulations. 
This is simply a consequence of the fact 
that while it is recognised that many of the 
parameters are clearly important, we do 
not in many cases have good ideas of what 
the parameter values should be. Person-
ally, I found that the complexity in under-
standing the effects of various input pa-
rameters was instructive by forcing me to think in 
greater detail about interactions in the modelled 
ecosystem. Potential users should make sure not 
to just accept the default settings for parameters, 
but explore further the consequences of changing 
them. One of the most important parameters to 
examine the effects of, as stated by Carl Walters 
and Villy Christensen, is the flow control 
(=vulnerability). Users should not overlook the 
importance of the need to examine  trends in 
temporal dynamics (rather than simple compari-
sons of conditionat the start and the end of simu-
lations), and should ensure that values of the pa-
rameters used are reported  with any simulations, 
since small changes to them may drastically alter 
results. 
 
Comments on the methodology 
 
1. All policy simulations are dependent on the results 
of the search procedure. The method used does not al-
ways seem to provide consistency in its results under 
the same conditions, thus it is imperative to examine 
thoroughly the effects of va rious options for the search 
procedure. Sometimes the procedure seems to con-
verge to more than 2, quite different solutions. A gen-
eral rule given by Carl Walters is that values of relative 
F above 20 are nonsense, so perhaps it is best to run 
the search again until better values are found. If no 
values are found, perhaps the scenario should be aban-
doned.  
2. It remains unclear to me how changes in flow con-
trol affect fishing, since fishing mortality is not directly 
linked with the flow control parameter. 
3. The question of the ecological importance settings 
remains to be resolved as to it’s interpretation. There 
was some confusion amongst those at the workshop. 
Using 1/(P/B) as a representation of the relative impor-
-50
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
c=0
c=0.2
c=0.4
c=0.6
c=0.8
c=1
c=2
c=4
c=6
c=8
c=10
Annual increase in catchability
Econ. Ecol. & Overall error score
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Social error score
Economic
E cosystem
Overall
Social
Figure 9. Error scores for policy evaluation criteria resulting 
from changes in catchability  
Page 82, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
tance of species implies th at slower growing longer 
lived individuals are intrinsi cally more important. Sev-
eral workshop participants felt that this was perhaps a 
better representation of ecological stability. 
4. Simulation results generally made sense. A common 
result from simulations aimed at maximising socio-
economic value of some fisheries was to fish hard on 
predators of highly valued species (in terms of money 
or job creation), thus removi ng a source of competition 
to the fishery. 
5. Sometimes counter-intuitive results occurred - e.g. 
the maximum economic value was not derived from the 
economic maximisation scenario. Others curious re-
sults, not easily explained, occurred in the examination 
of policy trade-offs. 
6. Little can be said with confidence on the effects of 
changes in the assumption on ecological importance 
settings since the variation resulting from different F 
estimates from the search procedure are greater than 
the differences between the assumptions on ecological 
importance. 
7. Results of the policy trade-offs, in the case of this 
model, are least sensitive to  changes in the weighting 
on ecosystem stability. 
8. The close loop simulated manager is another good 
addition, with the ability to examine the effects of 
changes in uncertainty associated with assessments 
and fishing efficiency. During closed loop simulations, 
increasing uncertainty with assessment methods pro-
duced increases in error scores for evaluation criteria. 
For the ecological stability criteria, the change in error 
was small initially and increased with increasing un-
certainty of the assessment. 
9. During closed loop simulations, the effects of an-
nual changes in catchability were most pronounced for 
initial small changes from zero to 0.4. 
10. As previously mentioned in the workshop, it would 
be helpful to see a measure of the variability resulting 
from closed loop simulations. 
 
References 
 
Christensen, V. 1995. A model of trophic interactions 
in the North Sea in 1981, the year of the Stomach. 
Dana 11(1): 1-28. 
Holdsworth, E.W.H. 1874. Deep sea fishing and fishing 
boats: an account of the practical working of the 
various fisheries around th e British Isles. Edward 
Stanford, 6,7, & 8, Charing Cross, S.W. London. 429 
pp. 
Mackinson, S. 2000. Representing trophic interactions 
in the North Sea in the 1880s, using the Ecopath 
mass-balance approach. Draf t technical report. 82 
pages. Fisheries Centre, Vancouver, Canada.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendices 
 
Appendix Table (i). Standard run settings. 
Duration of simulation (years) 20 
Integration steps (per year) 100 
Relaxation parameter [0,1] 0.5 
Discount rate (% per year) 4 
Equilibrium step size 0.003 
Equilibrium max. fishing rate (relative) 3 
Number of time steps for averaging results 5 
Discount rate 0.04 
 
Appendix Table (ii)
 Social settings. 
Gear typeC r e w  s i z e  J o b s /Catch
Drifters 14 7 
Trawlers and liners 9 4.5
Others 6 3
Pots 3 1.5 
Seal killing 2 1 
 
Appendix Table (iii) Ecological settings. 
 
 
Biomass Group 
B ideal 
/ B base
Import. 
Weight  
Subject.
Impor. 
Weight 
1/(P/B) 
Trophic 
Level 
Vuln. 
 
(prop.T
L)*Cetaceans 2 1 50.0 4.2 0. 42
Seals 1 0 16.7 4.8 0.48 
Seabirds 1 1 2.5 4.7 0.47 
Sharks 1 0 6.7 4.3 0.43
Juv. sharks 1 0 3.3 4.3 0.43
Rays and Skates 1 0 3.1 4 0.4
Juv. rays and skates 1 0 1.6 4 0.4
Bluefin tuna 1.5 1 2.9 4.6 0.46
Sturgeon 2 1 9.1 4 0.4
Cod 1.5 1 2.0 4.4 0.44
Juv. cod 1.5 1 1.0 3.9 0.39
Whiting 1 0 1.2 4.4 0.44
Juv. whiting 1 0 0.6 4.1 0.41 
Saithe 1 0 1.7 4.5 0.45
Juv. saithe 1 0 0.7 4.2 0.42
N.Sea mackerel 1 0 1.1 3.9 0.39
Westn. mackerel 1 0 1.1 3.9 0.39
Haddock 1 1 1.0 4 0.4
Juv. haddock 1 1 0.6 3.8 0.38 
Herring 1 1 0.8 3.4 0.34
Sprat 1 0 0.7 3.3 0.33
Norway pout 1 0 0.5 3.5 0.35 
Sandeel 1 0 0.4 3.4 0.34
Plaice 2 1 1.5 3.7 0.37 
Sole 2 1 1.6 3.6 0.36
Brill 2 1 2.3 3.8 0.38 
Halibut and turbot 2 1 3.7 4.6 0.46
Horse mackerel 1 0 1.4 4 0.4
Salmon and seatrout 1.5 1 1.3 4 0.4
Gurnards 1 0 0.7 4 0.4
Other predatory fish 1 0 0.9 4.3 0.43
Other prey fish 1 0 1.3 3.8 0.38 
Cephalopods 1 0 0.3 3.6 0.36
Zooplankton 1 0 0.1 2.1 0.21 
Euphasiids 1 0 0.2 2.8 0.28 
Ed’ crabs & lobsters 2 1 0.3 3.8 0.38 
Other crustaceans 1 0 0.3 2.6 0.26
Echinoderms 1 0 0.3 3.4 0.34
Polychaetes 1 0 0.3 2.5 0.25 
Other macrobenthos 1 0 0.3 2.9 0.29
Meiofauna 1 0 0.1 2.3 0.23
Benthic microflora 1 0 0.0 1.6 0.16 
P’tonic microflora 1 0 0.0 1.6 0.16 
Phytoplankton 1 0 0.0 1 0.1 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 83 
Ecosim Case Study: 
Port Phillip Bay, Australia 
 
 
Beth Fulton and Tony Smith 
CSIRO Marine Research, Hobart 
 
Abstract 
 
Port Phillip Bay is a large shallow, semi-enclosed ma-
rine embayment adjacent to the city of Melbourne, in 
southeast Australia. The bay is exploited both recrea-
tionally and commercially an d between 1992 and 1996 
was the subject of a large-sc ale study encompassing re-
search and monitoring in the fields of physical ocean-
ography, toxicants, algal nutrients, marine ecology and 
ecological modelling. Information from this study (in 
particular for the year 94-95) was used to construct and 
parameterise an Ecopath model of the system. 
 
Across the many vulnerability and policy options 
evaluated using this Ecopath with Ecosim model, three 
characteristic system states were found, which corre-
sponded with three possible policy objectives. These 
states can be summarised by the state of the shark 
component of the model. When economic objectives 
were dominant, sharks were  removed from the system; 
when there was a compromise between economic and 
ecological objectives, sharks persisted at current levels; 
and when ecological objectives were dominant, sharks 
increased in abundance. This  consistent response sug-
gests that, in this case, shar ks may be a good indicator 
species. However, the relati ve insensitivity to alterna-
tive policy settings of other groups, primarily those in 
the lower trophic levels of the model, suggests that they 
may not be good indicator species for the effects of fish-
ing. Lastly, it was clear that  the criteria used to deter-
mine management objectives must be carefully consid-
ered, as economic and social objectives may lead to 
substantial restructuring of ecosystems unless they are 
balanced with some ecological reference points. Simi-
larly, conservation and public pressure to preserve 
charismatic species may not lead to balanced ecosys-
tems either. Some measure of importance must be 
given to all groups in the system if a balanced, ecologi-
cally robust system is to be achieved. 
 
 
 
General Introduction 
 
Port Phillip Bay (PPB) is a large shallow marine 
embayment adjacent to the city of Melbourne. 
The bay is approximately 1930 km
2 in area and is 
2 6 m  a t  i t s  d e e p e s t ,  t h o u g h  o v e r  h a l f  o f  i t  i s  l e s s  
than 8m deep. Its catchment is home to over 3 
million people (16% of the total Australian popu-
lation) and as a consequence Port Phillip Bay is 
exploited both recreationally and commercially.  
 
The commercial fishery takes between 700 and 
2000t of finfish from the bay every year, which 
includes 60 species and has a total wholesale 
value of about AUD$3 million. This is low relative 
to other Australian bays (adjusting for size), but 
invertebrate fisheries more than make up for the 
difference. Currently 6 00t of cultured mussels  
Figure 1. Schematic representing the various groups in the Port Phillip Bay Ecopath model, they’re relative biomasses 
and trophic levels. Boxes which are larger contain more bioma ss, trophic level is given by the axis on the left. Actual 
flows, such as that due to consumption, are omitted here for clarity. 
Page 84, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
and 50t of wild abalone are harvested annually 
(worth AUD$1.5 and $1 million respectively) and 
these dominate the invertebrate catch contribu-
tion. Until recently scallops were also harvested 
quite intensively, bringing  in up to 10000t (shell 
weight), but that fishery is now closed. The rec-
reational fishery is thought to land about 470t of 
fish a year (effort is estimated at about 670,000 
angler hours per year). 
 
A large study of the bay, the Port Phillip Bay En-
vironmental Study (PPBES), was undertaken be-
tween 1992 and 1996. This study encompassed 
research and monitoring in the fields of physical 
oceanography, toxicants, algal nutrients, marine 
ecology and ecological modelling (Harris et al 
1996). Information from this study was used to 
construct the Ecopath model discussed here. In 
particular the year 94-95 was used to parameter-
ise the model, as that was the time when there 
was the greatest amount of information overlap 
for the various components. It was necessary to 
use data from years either side to complete the in-
formation in a few cases. 
 
The ECOPATH model for the Bay  
 
The pools and settings for the PPB Ecopath model 
are summarized in Table 1 and the flow diagram 
in Figure 1 (and the model can be found on the 
Ecopath website). The PPB model appears to in-
clude more detail at lower trophic levels than 
many other current Ecopath models. Where pos-
sible, information was taken from the technical 
reports published for the PPBES.  
 
It was necessary during the model balancing 
phase to move some estimates to the edge of the 
ranges quoted in the reports, but no estimate was 
moved beyond those ranges. All calculations were 
initially done using nitrogen as the unit of bio-
mass (mg N m-3), which was then converted to 
tonnes (wet weight)/km
2 using the assumption 
that wet weight = 100*N and the volume of PPB is 
2.6809*e10 m3.  
 
Where possible, groups were split so that canni-
balism was less than 1% of predation. This was 
not possible for the zooplankton due to a lack of 
information, nor was it possible for the lumped 
piscivore group (cohort splitting did reduce it 
substantially but not completely). Thus these 
groups continued to have cannibalism > 5%. The 
most uncertain biomass values are for the benthic 
invertebrate groups. Unfortunately they are also 
among the largest pools.  
 
Seven fishing fleets were included in the Ecopath 
model, including purse seine, scallop dredge, haul 
seine, longline, mesh nets, hand (diving) and pot. 
The aquaculture of mussels  is also included. No 
costs were built in due to a lack of information. 
The fishery information is summarized in Table 2.
 
 
A mediation effect was included in the Ecosim 
model to reflect the importance of seagrass to ju-
venile King George Whiting. Careful attention 
was paid to whether or not the mediation made 
the model any more likely to fall into chaotic or 
oscillatory behaviour, there was no evidence that 
it did. An Ecospace model of PPB was also devel-
oped, with eight habitats (Corio, Geelong Arm, 
High nutrient, Shallow, Intermediate, Central 
mud, Swan Bay and Sands), and an advection set 
calculated with a Coriolis parameter of –0.5. Re-
sults from this model are not reported here. 
Unless noted below or in the tables, all parameter 
settings were as of the Ecosim defaults. 
 
Results of policy evaluations 
 
Policies were evaluated over a 30 year time frame, 
starting from the base Ecopath year of 1995. The 
social and ecological criteria used are given in Ta-
bles 3 and 4 respectively, and the results of the 
policy analyses are summarized in Table 5. There 
are few differences between the economic and so-
cial strategies, due to the absence of costs, and so 
the results below are summarized only for the 
economic strategy. 
 
Table 3.  Social weightings used 
Gear Type Jobs/Catch 
Purse seine 1 
Scallop Dredge 1 
Haul seine 1 
Longline 0.5 
Mesh nets 1 
Dive 0.2 
Aquaculture 0.1 
Pots 0.5 
 
Under the original vulnerability settings (a de-
fault value of 0.3 for all groups), most groups are 
stable under status quo Fs, except for King 
George whiting, which declines. Using estimates 
of the state of the various fished groups relative to 
their virgin levels of egg production, the vulner-
abilities were tuned to more reasonable values. 
Most groups ended up with a vulnerability of 0.5, 
though scallops, abalone, clupeoids and both the 
piscivore age classes were lower (0.48, 0.45, 0.45, 
0.4 and 0.4 respectively). Southern rock lobster, 
juvenile snapper, marine mammals and both age 
groups of King George Whiting were higher (0.8, 
0.6, 0.9, 0.8 and 0.8 respectively). With these 
vulnerability settings, all groups were at a stable 
equilibrium (no mean increase or decrease) under 
status quo Fs. 
 
Table 1.   Ecopath groups and settings. Note all values shown are the final (balanced) values used. Notes on changes made during balancing refer to those made to the 
original values to achieve the values shown here. Also note the original P/B and Q/B for pilchards were halved and all those for all other fish (juvenile snapper down to 
Rays) were quartered during balancing. TS = Trawl scalar (multiplier of trawl survey catch to get final biomass estimate – to take into account trawl efficiency). 
 
Group name Habitat 
area 
B (t/km²) P / B  
(/yr) 
Q / B 
(/yr) 
Unassim Q EE* P/Q* Catch 
(t/km
2 /yr)
Discards 
(t/km2/ 
yr) 
Notes References 
Phytoplankton 1 7.617 250 - - 0.604 - 0 0 Lumped all phytoplankton. Increased 
P/B by 15% in balancing. 
Murray and Parlsow, 
1997 
Small zooplank-
ton 
1 6.477 36.8 59.781 0.3 0.713 0.616 0 0 Zooflagellates and small copepods. 
Increased Q/B by 32% in balancing. 
Beattie et al 1996 (Q/B, 
B) Holloway and Jen-
kins 1993 (P/B). 
Large zooplank-
ton 
1 9.974 23.8 38.609 0.3 0.866 0.616 0 0 Mesozooplankton. Increased Q/B by 
32% in balancing.  
Beattie et al 1996 (Q/B, 
B) Holloway and Jen-
kins 1993 (P/B) 
Deposit Feeders 0.835 69.948 4.8 66.7 0.3 0.73 0. 072 0 0 Decreased B by 40% during balancing 
(otherwise needed HUGE detritus 
import) 
Poore 1992 
Wilson et al 1993 
 
Scallops and 
mussels 
0.835 4.922 3.1 10.9 0.3 0.25 0.284 0.862 0.25 Wild scallops and cultured mussels. 
Reduced by 10% during balancing. 
Kailola et al 1993 
Poore 1992 
Wilson et al 1993 
Filter Feeders 0.85 73.511 2.8 11.8 0.3 0.756 0.237 0 0.025 Non commercial filter feeders (in-
cluding oysters). Decreased by 35% 
during balancing. 
Poore 1992 
Wilson et al 1993 
Infaunal Preda-
tors 
0.4 13.575 5.4 58.4 0.2 0.999 0.092 0  0 Burrowing worms mainly. Reduced 
by 20% in balancing 
As above 
Epifaunal Preda-
tors 
0.4 2.363 2.9 21.9 0.2 0.97 8 0.132 0 0.026 Crustaceans,  gastropods and starfish. 
Reduced by 10% during balancing. 
As above 
Sth Rock Lobster 0.37 0.068 0.73 12 .41 0.2 0.874 0.059 0.003 0 Reduced by 2% during balancing. Anon 1996 
Wilson et al 1993 
Abalone 0.37 0.699 0.73 12.41 0.3 0.994 0.059 0.048 0 Green an d black lip. Reduced by 2% 
during balancing. 
Anon 1996 
Poore 1992 
Wilson et al 1993 
Other Grazers 0.4 2.249 0.88 11.68 0.3 0.758 0. 075 0 0 Urchins the only species of this 
lumped grouped actually fished. Re-
duced by 10% during balancing 
Anon 1996  
Kailola et al 1993 
Poore 1992 
Wilson et al 1993 
Scavengers 0.4 9.326 6.86 55.48 0.25 0.834 0.124 0 0 Reduced by 10% during balancing Poore 1992 
Wilson et al 1993 
Microphyto-
benthos 
1 18.135 44 - - 0.14 - 0 0 P/B increased by 25% during balanc-
ing 
Murray and Parlsow 
1997 
Seagrass 0.1 2.591 24 - - 0.345 - 0 0.01  P/B increased by 25% during balanc-
ing 
Murray and Parlsow 
1997 
Macroalgae 0.7 25.907 20 - - 0.301 - 0 0. 01 P/B increased by 25% during balanc-
ing 
Murray and Parlsow 
1997 
Clupeoids 1 2.85 1.15 30.15 0.2 0.993 0.038 0.81 2 0 Pilchards, anchovy and sprat.  Anon 1996 
Hall 1992 
Parry et al 1995 
            
Page 86, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Table 1. continued. 
Group name Habitat 
area 
B (t/km²) P / B  
(/yr) 
Q / B 
(/yr) 
Unassim Q EE* P/Q* Catch 
(t/km
2 /yr)
Discards 
(t/km2/ 
yr) 
Notes References 
Juvenile Snapper 0.7 0.469 0.548 2.737 0.2 0.973 0.2 0.012 0 <3 yr s. VBGF k = 0.1079, Wavg/Wk = 
1.16 
Officer and Parry 1996 
Parry et al 1995 
Gunthorpe et al 1997 
Snapper 0.7 0.376 0.493 2.737 0.2 0.785 0.18 0.033 0.001 3+ Spli t (for all split fish groups) 
based on recruitment to fishery and 
50% maturity 
As above 
Juvenile Flatfish 0.75 2.319 0.821 2.737 0.2 0.977 0.3 0.004 0.001 <3 yrs. VBGF k = 0.19, Wavg/Wk = 
1.2 
As above 
Flatfish 0.75 2.285 0.411 2.737 0.2 0.902 0.15 0.143 0.011 3+ As above 
Juvenile KG 
Whiting 
0.8 0.142 0.821 2.737 0.2 0.936 0.3 0.06  0 <3 yrs. VBGF k = 0.16, Wavg/Wk = 
1.1. TS = 5 
As above 
KG Whiting 0.8 0.117 0.548 2.737 0.2 0. 293 0.2 0.001 0 3+  TS = 5 As above 
Juvenile Pis-
civores 
0.72 0.567 0.821 2.737 0.2 0.999 0.3 0 0 <3 yrs. VBGF k = 0.42, Wavg/Wk = 
1.1. TS = 20 
As above 
Piscivores 0.72 0.288 0.411 2.737 0.2 0.92 0.15  0.001 0 3+ To get B used demersal trawl data 
and TS = 20 
As above 
Juvenile Mullet 0.825 0.526 0.411 2.737 0.3 0.99 3 0.15 0 0 <3 yrs. VBGF  k = 0.271, Wavg/Wk = 
1.15. TS = 4.45 
As above 
Mullet and Gar-
fish 
0.825 0.383 0.329 2.737 0.3 0.909 0.12 0.053 0  3+. To get B used demersal trawl data 
and TS = 4.45 
As above 
Other demersals 0.965 4.899 0.548 2.737 0.2 0.849 0.2 0. 041 0 All other demersal finfish. TS = 2 As above 
Southern cala-
mari 
0.93 0.319 1.825 18.25 0.2 0.785 0.1 0. 05 0 TS = 4 Officer and Parry 1996 
Parry et al 1995 
Gunthorpe et al 1997 
Lee 1994 
Other cephalo-
pods 
0.945 0.415 1.369 9.125 0.2 0.952 0.1 5 0 0 Octopus. TS = 4 As above 
Rays 0.9 6.166 0.234 1.56 0.2 0.007 0.15 0 0  Officer and Parry 1996 
Parry et al 1995 
Gunthorpe et al 1997 
Schmid et al 1993. 
Sharks 0.62 0.148 0.234 1.56 0. 2 0.639 0.15 0.002 0.001 To get B used demersal trawl data, TS 
= 13.35. 
As above 
 
Birds 1 1.018 0.07 1.69 0.2 0.145 0.041 0 0 Based on representa tive densities of 
shorebirds in similar habitats else-
where in the world and map of PPB 
bird habitat. 
Briggs et al 1987 
Pices 1998 
Marine mam-
mals 
1 0.02 0.09 19.88 0.2 0.006 0.005 0 0 Do lphins and seals Dolphin Research In-
stitute 2000 
Detritus 1 14766.84 - - - 0.994 - 0 0 398.96 t imported per yr. Biomass 
represents top 20cm of sediment. 
Nicholson et al 1996 
Harris et al 1996 
 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 87 
 
Table 2  Fishery settings and information: background Fishery Information and History. Blanks do not represent zeros, but lack of information. 
 
Fishery Commercial 
Catch and Effort 
(% Vic/Aust 
catches) 
Recreational 
Catch 
Commercial An-
nual Value 
(AUD) 
Socioeconomic Importance Fi shing Method and Manage-
ment 
(LML = legal min length) 
History 
Abalone 34 – 92t live 
weight taken an-
nually (mean 
52t) 
= 5% Vic 
 
 
2% of commer-
cial catch 
$650,000 - 
$1,700,000 
Economically very important, 
due to high value, high li-
cence/ processing fees. 
Poaching =  problem. 
Divers on Hookah off small 
boats. 34 commercial licences 
for the zone including PPB (li-
cence limitation began in 
1968) and ITQ. Recreational 
divers have a 10 abalone per 
day bag limit. LML = 10cm. 
Fishery began 1962. 1968 li-
cences and LML introduced. 
1984 licence reduction 
scheme (2 for 1) 
Anchovies 16 – 138t 
(mean 73t) 
= 40% Vic 
= 40% Aust. 
 $19,000 - 
$209,000 
 Purse seine (alternate/ inci-
dental target for pilchard fish-
ery). 118 commercial licences. 
Fishery was highest during 
1970s but had dropped by 
50% by the end of the 80s 
(unknown cause, maybe 
heavy fishing) 
Barracouta 1 – 5t 
(mean 2.65t) 
= 20% Vic 
 $1,000 -$4,200    
Blue Mussel 600 – 650t (cul-
tured on ropes) 
Small amount of 
wild stock (used 
as bait) 
$1,500,000  20 aquaculture entitlements 
for the bay. 3 commercial diver 
licences for the bay (dredging 
banned now but used to bring 
in up to 1000t) 
Farming began in 1984. 
Flathead 24 – 171t 240t + $40,000 - 
$58,000 
Socially very important as is 
one of the main targets of the 
rec fishery, not as important 
commercially. 
Mesh nets. 118 commercial li-
cences. Recreational fishers 
need a licence, but the number 
of these is unlimited.  
Peaked in 1950s (at about 
171t) dropped to 50t by late 
1980s and now about 25t 
(market now prefers other ta-
ble fish) 
Flounder 7 – 20t 
(mean 13t) 
= 44% Vic 
=17% Aust 
 $34,000 - 
$101,000 
 118 commercial licences. By-
catch species of scallop dredge 
fishery too. 
 
Garfish 37 – 58t 
(mean 52t) 
= 34% Vic 
= 4% Aust 
18t $162,000 – 
$226,000 
 Haul seines. 118 commercial li-
cences. 
 
King George Whiting 47 – 130t 
(mean 69.5t) 
= 35% Vic 
= 6% Aust 
62t $526,000 - 
$857,000 
One of the most important 
commercial species in PPB. 
Haul seines. 118 commercial li-
cences. Bag limit of 20 fish if 
recreational. LML = 27cmTL 
Fishery began 1960s. Cur-
rently listed as stable there is 
concern as to stock health. 
Other Cephalopods 0.2 – 0.5t  $6000 - $8000 Bait fi shery really Incidental catch of haul seines 
and dredges 
 
Other Finfish 79 – 269t 51t $163,000 - 
$655,000 
 Haul seines, purse seines, 
longlines and mesh nets 
 
 
 
      
Page 88, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management  
Table 2. continued. 
 
      
Fishery Commercial 
Catch and Effort 
(% Vic/Aust 
catches) 
Recreational 
Catch 
Commercial An-
nual Value 
(AUD) 
Socioeconomic Importance Fi shing Method and Manage-
ment 
(LML = legal min length) 
History 
Pilchard 324 – 2058t 
(mean 1347t) 
= 62% Vic 
= 14% Aust 
Small (most bait 
actually pur-
chased from 
commercial 
catches) 
$465,000 - 
$2,278,000 
Largest finfish fishery, but 
demand is really dictated by 
the petfood and tuna farm in-
dustries 
Purse seines. 18 commercial li-
cences. 
Mean catch 1970s – early 
1980s was about 325t (in-
creasing trend). Substantial 
kill in 1995. 
Rock Lobster 4 – 5t  $100,000 - 
$150,000 
 Potting season closed June – 
November. Pots must have es-
cape slots. Recreational fishers 
can only take 4 per person per 
day. LML = 105/ 110 mm (fe-
male/male) 
Began 1900s. 1950s seasonal 
fishery. 1958 LML put on, 
seasonal closures started. 
1968 fixed entry scheme. 1971 
bag limit for rec. 1980s enti-
tlements reduced. 
Scallops 540 – 10450t 
live weight (meat 
weight *6.5) 
= 75% Vic 
 $1,000,000 - 
$15,000,000 
Was very important fishery as 
was the largest invertebrate 
fishery before it was closed. 
Some aquaculture has now 
started. 
Dredging (now closed), with 18 
PPB and 66 duel (PPB/Vic wa-
ters) licences. Recreational bag 
limit of 100 per day. No strict 
LML but fishery closes when 
>20% catch <70mm (now 
happening more often). 
Dredge fishery began 1963. 
Crashed in 1969. Recovered 
and crashed again in 1989-
1990. VERY variable. 
Shark 4 – 22t  $69,000 - 
$91,000 
 Longlines, usually bycatch of 
snapper fishery. 118 commer-
cial licences. 
 
Snapper 41 – 319t 
=78% Vic 
= 2% Aust 
10t $345,000 - 
$1,174,000+ 
Of decreasing importance as 
not as economically attractive 
or efficient as other fisheries 
(lines are stripped by rec fish-
ers with GPS) so fishers are 
aging out of fisheries without 
replacement (thus effort has 
dropped) 
Longlines. Gear, effort, season 
and area restrictions in place. 
LML = 27cm 
Began 1843. Licences and 
LML intro 1915. LML at cur-
rent level 1926. Declined early 
1950s. Beach seining dropped 
out in 1970s when more and 
more input control intro-
duced. 
Southern Calamari 17 – 63t 
= 48% Vic 
78 – 130t $83,000 - 
$246,000 
 Haul seines (62% of catch) or 
squid jigs commercially. Rec-
reational = anglers. 
Decreasing trend since 1960s 
(unknown whether decline of 
effort or stock) 
Sprat 2 – 74t  $2,000 - 
$95,000 
 Purse seine (alternate/ inci-
dental target for pilchard fish-
ery). 118 commercial licences. 
 
Urchins 0.3 – 0.8t  $500  Incidental target for abalone 
fishery. 
 
Yellow-eye Mullet 30 – 86t 
(mean 46.5t) 
= 24% Vic 
= 8% Aust 
11t $31,000 - 
$94,000 
 Haul seines. 118 commercial li-
cences. 
 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 89 
W h e n  f o r c e d  b y  h i s t o r i c a l  t i m e  s e r i e s  o f  F ,  t h e  
Ecosim predictions matched historical time series 
of population fluctuations well. These vulnerabil-
ity settings were then used through out the policy 
analysis discussed here – except for a sensitivity 
analysis the results of which will be briefly de-
scribed below. 
 
Under the economic strategy (Figure 2), Fs are 
increased for most fisheries, except for the pot 
(rock lobster) fishery. The most notable increase 
is for the mesh net fishery, which results in the 
commercial extinction of sharks and flatfish. 
These are predators of other fished species, the 
latter generally having higher commercial value. 
Marine mammals decline to about two thirds of 
their biomass under status quo fishing, while 
scallops decline to about half. Of the non-fished 
groups, epifaunal biomass shows a notable in-
crease, while piscivores decline. 
The ecosystem strategy (Figure 3) results in lower 
Fs for all fisheries except the dive (abalone) fish-
ery.  This in turn  results in  increases  in most 
groups, except abalone. The 
reason for the increased fish-
ing on abalone is not yet un-
derstood. In contrast with the 
economic strategy, the sharks 
in particular show a major in-
crease, and the flatfish are 
steady. The marine mammals 
more than double their bio-
mass relative to that under the 
economic strategy. These im-
provements in biomass are at 
the expense of reductions in 
total value of catch to about 
20% of those under the eco-
nomic strategy. 
 
In trying to find a compromise 
between economic and eco-
logical objectives, it was nec-
essary to give ecological objec-
tives a higher weighting than 
those of economics to have 
any apparent impact upon the 
outcome. There was no 
smooth transition in effects as 
the weights varied from heav-
ily ecological to economic; 
rather there was a two step 
jump. With the ecological 
weighting set to 1, the first 
jump occurs at an economic 
weighting of 0.5 (see compro-
mise strategy in Table 5). This 
outcome is very similar in 
form to the economic solution 
(Figure 4) except that flatfish are not reduced as 
much, while sharks and mammals are not de-
pressed at all, and snappe r is allowed to increase 
rather than decrease. The second jump is straight 
to the full economic solution. This jump occurs 
quite suddenly at an economic weight of 0.71. At 
this point there are two equally strong minima in 
the objective function, one corresponding to the 
economic solution and the other to the interme-
diate (first step) solution (see flip point strategy 
in Table 5). 
 
To assess the impact of the vulnerability settings 
on the conclusions, the policy analysis was re-
peated under three sets of vulnerabilities. The 
first set was a blanket 0.2 for all groups, except 
the snappers, which had to be reduced to 0.01 to 
achieve long term stability. The second set was a 
blanket 0.7 for all groups. The final set scaled 
vulnerabilities with trop hic level (starting with 
the lowest groups having v = 0.1 and increasing 
with trophic level up to marine mammals which 
had a v = 0.95). 
Table 4. Ecological weightings used. 
 Strategies 
 Charismatic Equal B/P 
 
Group 
Bideal/B Import-
ance 
Bideal/B Import-
ance 
Bideal/B Import-
ance 
Phytoplankton 1 0 1 1 2 0.004 
Small zooplankton 1 0 1.5 1 2 0.027 
Large zooplankton 1 0 1.5 1 2 0.042 
Deposit Feeders 1 0 1.5 1 2 0.208 
Scallops and mussels 1 0 5 1 2 0.323 
Filter Feeders 1 0 1 1 2 0.357 
Inf. Predators 1 0 1 1 2 0.185 
Epi. Predators 1 0 2 1 2 0.345 
Sth Rock Lobster 1 0 5 1 2 1.37 
Abalone 1 0 3 1 2 1.37 
Other Grazers 1 0 1.5 1 2 1.137 
Scavengers 1 0 1 1 2 0.146 
Microphytobenthos 1 0 1 1 2 0.023 
Seagrass 1 1 1 1 2 0.042 
Macroalgae 1 0 1 1 2 0.05 
Clupeoids 1 0 2 1 2 0.87 
Juvenile Snapper 1 0 1 1 2 1.825 
Snapper 4 0.1 4 1 2 2.028 
Juvenile Flatfish 1 0 1 1 2 1.218 
Flatfish 1 0 2 1 2 2.433 
Juvenile KG Whiting 1 0 1 1 2 1.218 
KG Whiting 5 0.1 5 1 2 1.825 
Juvenile Piscivores 1 0 1 1 2 1.218 
Piscivores 1 0 3 1 2 2.433 
Juvenile Mullet 1 0 1 1 2 2.433 
Mullet and Garfish 1 0 2 1 2 3.04 
Other demersals 1 0 2 1 2 1.82 
Southern calamari 1 0 2 1 2 0.548 
Other cephalopods 1 0 1.5 1 2 0.73 
Rays 1 0.1 1 1 2 4.274 
Sharks 2 1 2 1 2 4.274 
Birds 3 1 3 1 2 14.286 
Marine mammals 4 1 4 1 2 11.111 
Page 90, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
 
Under an economic objective, the results are rela-
tively insensitive to the vulnerability setting, 
though there are some changes in the King 
George Whiting, Southern Rock lobster and 
Snapper from case to case. The one exception is 
the blanket v=0.7 case, where the outcome more 
closely resembles the original ecological outcome. 
Using the ecological objective, the results are far 
more variable between th e different vulnerability 
settings. The behaviour of Scallops and Mussels, 
Abalone, Southern Calamari, Cephalopods and 
Snapper is particularly affected. However, the 
overall results are consistent across vulnerabili-
ties, the greatest difference being for v=0.2 which 
produced a more “intuitive” answer. In this case, 
the increase in the biomass of “charismatic” spe-
cies did not come at the expense of the elimina-
tion of other “unimportant” species, but rather all 
s p e c i e s  w e r e  m a i n t a i n e d   a t   a c c e p t a b l e   l e v e l s .  
Table 5. Results of policy optimisations. There were two equally st rong minima at the flip point so both are reported 
here for that strategy weighting. Status quo and F at 64 have no weightings reported in the table as they were sketched 
out in Ecosim and then just run through the closed loop wi thout first using an open loop optimisation. The Ratio of 
End/Start values gives the relative change in catch over the 30 year period by dividing the catch at the beginning of year 
0 by the catch at the end of year 30. The qualitative responses are given for those groups which showed some change 
under the various policies, but aren’t primary fishing target species. Flat indicates that the trace for the species moved 
straight across and showed no trend away from equilibrium. A “+” indicates the species trace showed an increase with 
time (the more +s the greater the increase). A “-“ indicates the species trace showed a decrease with time (the more -s 
the greater the decrease). “Oscillate” indicates that the species trace followed periodic fluctuations (like those of a stable 
limit cycle). 
 Strategy 
 
Status Quo Economic Social Ecosystem Compr-
omise 
Flip point 
(min1/min2) F at 64 B/P 
Weighting         
Economic - 1 0.0001 0.0001 0.5 0.71 - 0.0001 
Social - 0.0001 1 0.0001 0.5 0.71 - 0.0001 
Ecosystem - 0.0001 0.0001 1 1 1 - 1 
Objective Function         
Economic 163.76 300.13 299.00 63.7 4 222.89 222.35 / 256.52 60.90 110.83 
Social 163.76 233.16 233.71 46.2 9 163.33 163.41 / 197.44 60.90 67.94 
Ecosystem 0.00 -609.50 -620.85 -390.74 - 449.91 -467.89 / -518.21 -548.57 -1442.36 
Estimated Relative Fs         
Purse seine 1 2.6 2.8 0.3 2 2.0 / 1.9 64 0.2 
Scallop Dredge 1 2.9 2.8 0.8 3 3.1 / 3.0 64 0.8 
Haul seine 1 0.8 0.9 0 0.4 0.5 / 0.6 64 0.5 
Longline 1 1.9 2.8 0.1 0.3 1.0 / 0.5 64 0.2 
Mesh nets 1 20.8 20.1 0.3 2.1 1.8 / 20.1 64 0.2 
Dive 1 1.3 1.2 2.6 1.3 1.2 / 1.3 64 0.5 
Pots 1 0.6 0.9 1.2 0.6 1.0 / 0.7 64 0.5 
Overall Average         
Total Catch 849.28 1457 1447.8 479.63 1215.12 1805.63 / 1947.98 1789.02 525.41 
Total Value 1222177 1877457 1878475 546499.3 133755 1481459 / 1892616 632218 818937.1
Ratio End/Start          
Total Biomass 1 0.74 0.73 1.09  0.89 0.99 / 0.87 0.75 1.06 
Mammal Biomass 0.98 0.66 0.61 1.41  1.15 1.1 / 0.72 0.001 1.16 
Shark Biomass 0.97 0 0 1.9 1.1 1.04 / 0 0.116 1.2 
Shark Catch 0.97 0 0 1.53 0.27 1.02 / 0 0 1.21 
King George Whiting B 0.77 1.99 1.85 3.93 2.87 2.83 / 1.55 0 2.78 
King George Whiting C 0.77 2.67 1.46 0 0.62 2.83 / 1.6 0 2.78 
Snapper Biomass 1.01 0.83 0.48 1.09 1.63 1.01 / 1.18 0 0.78 
Snapper Catch 1.01 0.82 0.4 0. 79 0.44 1.01 / 1.18 0 0.78 
Flatfish Biomass 1.01 0 0 1. 07 0.64 0.74 / 0 0 0.94 
Flatfish Catch 1.01 0 0 0.88 0.16 0.73 / 0 0 0.95 
Abalone Biomass 0.95 0.79 0.99 0.01 0.69 0.87 / 1.07 0 1.05 
Abalone Catch 0.95 0.98 0.56 0. 01 0.17 0.87 / 1.05 0 1.05 
Clupeoid Biomass 1 0.79 0.79 1. 25 0.83 1.01 / 1.07 0 1.21 
Clupeoid Catch 1 0.59 0.68 1. 02 0.18 1.01 / 1.06 0 1.22 
Scallop Biomass 1 0.52 0.51 1.15 0.67 1 / 0.95 0 1.11 
Scallop Catch 1 0.74 0.62 1.01 0.19 1 / 0.96 0 1.13 
Qualitative Responses         
Zooplankton Biomass flat + + - - + / flat +++ - 
Piscivore Biomass flat -- -- + + -- / -- oscillate + 
Other demersal Bmass flat - - - flat flat / - oscillate - 
Epifaunal Biomass flat ++ ++ - flat flat / ++ oscillate - 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 91 
The conclusions from the sensitivity analyses are 
that the general policy analysis is fairly robust 
across vulnerability settings in this case, though 
the “standard economic solution” disappears at 
higher vulnerabilities. Furthermore, it is worth 
noting that oscillating output is very likely if the 
majority of the vulnerabilities are set at either ex-
treme. At the lower end vulnerabilities it is really 
only an artifact of a mismatch in the numerical 
scheme used and the mean of the oscillations is 
trustworthy. At the higher end though it is the re-
sult of chaotic dynamics and is thus often unin-
terpretable.
   
 
As with vulnerabilities, policy outcomes seem 
relatively insensitive to minor changes in the 
various ecological importance criteria. It was 
found that abalone are no longer eliminated when 
some importance is placed  on its retention in the 
system. 
 
One notable feature of the PPB Ecosim model is 
the relative lack of responsiveness at lower tro-
phic levels. This contrasts with other trophic 
models being developed for the PPB system. To 
test whether such responsiveness 
could be “forced” within Ecosim, one 
scenario examined the consequences 
of increasing the Fs on all fisheries to 
64 times their current levels. Not sur-
prisingly, all the fish groups were rap-
idly depleted, but there was still very 
little response in the lower trophic lev-
els. This may be due to the amount of 
“leeway” in the EE values for the pri-
mary producers in the system (as little 
as 0.6), as they are feeding the domi-
nant detrital foodweb rather than the 
classic, primary producer based,  
foodweb in this system. The introduc-
tion of a dummy fleet that fishes zoo-
plankton and detritivores detritivores 
could allow some exploration of this is-
sue. 
 
Discussion 
 
For the Port Phillip Bay model exam-
ined in this study, there are three char-
acteristic system responses corre-
sponding to three possible policy ob-
jectives. These can be best summarized 
using the sharks as an indicator spe-
cies: 
 
1. Economic objectives are dominant: 
sharks are removed from the system; 
2. Compromise of economic and ecological 
objectives: sharks persist at current levels; 
3. Ecological objectives are dominant: 
sharks allowed to increase.  
 
The fact that these results are so consistent across 
parameter settings, and that most of the ancillary 
groups are so unresponsi ve under the different 
objectives, highlights a few interesting points.  
 
The first of these is that in this study sharks act as 
a very good indicator spec ies for both system re-
sponse and policy objectives. Choice of ecological 
indicators has become a very important topic re-
cently. Identifying a species or group that is sensi-
tive to system changes and which is a useful 
measure of policy performance would prove very 
useful, both within model studies and in field 
monitoring. 
 
The second point raised by the results of the pol-
icy analysis is that the modelled system is fairly 
insensitive, with some pools showing no change 
even under extreme changes, such as F at 64 
times current levels. This suggests either that the 
model itself is insensit ive to change, and that 
some structural exploration may be of use, and/or 
that the system itself is robust to change as it is 
Figure 2  – Biomass through time plots for the optimisation under 
primarily economic objective. 
Page 92, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
built primarily upon a detritus based foodweb 
rather than a classical web. Simulations from an-
other dynamic model program suggest that Port 
Phillip Bay is much more strongly affected by eu-
trophication than by fishing, and this may explain 
and support the insensitivity of the lower trophic 
groups in the Ecoosim simulations run here. Ei-
ther way, more research into the form and basis 
of the foodwebs in Port Phillip Bay, especially the 
pelagic ones, would be instructive in evaluating 
how well the Bay might cope with increasing pres-
sures.  
 
Lastly, an important cautionary note. The lack of 
cost data for the fisheries meant that the eco-
nomic objectives really only used the value of the 
fisheries to determine the outcome. The inclusion 
of reliable and realistic cost data may well see dif-
ferent or at least a wider range of results and is an 
exercise that will be completed in the near future. 
 
General conclusions
 
 
Vulnerabilities are one of the most crucial ele-
ments of Ecosim and their potential effect on pol-
icy evaluations can not be neglected. Ecosim’s 
best performance (with regard to matching real-
ity) is most often seen when higher trophic levels 
or heavily depleted groups have high prey vulner-
abilities and lower trophic levels have v in the 
range 0.4 to 0.5. Furthermore, even though vul-
nerabilities generally had little qualitative effect 
on the overall outcome of the policy evaluations 
in this case, it was apparent that the choice of 
vulnerability settings may prove to be crucial in 
other circumstances and so must be given a good 
deal of attention. For instance if we had been con-
cerned more with a part icular species, say aba-
lone, rather than the system as a whole then vul-
nerabilities and their effect on policy evaluation 
may have had a much more striking impact here.   
 
The criteria used to determine management ob-
jectives must also be carefully considered. Eco-
nomic and social objectives may lead to radical 
restructuring of ecosystems unless they are bal-
anced with some ecological reference points. 
However, conservation and public pressure to 
preserve charismatic species may not, in fact 
probably will not, lead to balanced ecosystems. 
Some measure of importance must be given to all 
groups in the system if a balanced, ecologically 
robust system is to result from management pol-
icy implementation. 
 
References 
 
Anon, 1996. Catch and Effort Information Bulletin 
1995. Conservation and Natural Resources: Victo-
rian Fisheries Research Institute: Queenscliff, Vic-
toria, Australia. 
Beattie, G., A. Redden and R. Royle 1996. Microzoo-
plankton Grazing on Phytoplankton in Port Phillip 
Figure 3 – Biomass through time plots for the op-
timisation under primarily ecological objective. 
Figure 4 – Biomass through time plots for the com-
promise, or first step change, optimisation 

Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 93 
Bay. Technical Report No. 31. Port Phillip Bay En-
vironmental Study. CSIRO: Canberra, Australia.  
Briggs, K.T., W.B. Tyler, D. B. Lewis, D.B. and D.R. 
Carlson 1987. Bird Communities at Sea off Califor-
nia: 1975-1983. Studies in Avian Biology. 11. 
Dolphin Research Institut e 2000. Dolphin Education 
Project Question and Answers. Dolphin Research 
Institute: Frankston, Victoria, Australia. Also 
available at 
http://www.dolphinresearch.org.au/institute.html 
Gunthorpe, L., P. Hamer and S. Walker 1997. Bays and 
Inlets Scalefish Fisheries Review: Volume 1: Life 
cycles and habitat requirements of selected Victo-
rian fish species, including an assessment of the 
main habitat threatening processes and recom-
mendations for habitat maintenance, rehabilita-
tion and enhancement. Marine and Freshwater 
Resources Institute: Queens cliff, Victoria, Austra-
lia. 
Hall, D.N. (ed), 1992. Port  Phillip Bay Environmental 
Study: Status Review. Technical Report No. 9. Port 
Phillip Bay Environmental Study. CSIRO: Can-
berra, Australia.  
Harris, G., G. Batley, D. Fox, D. Hall, P. Jernakoff, R. 
M o l l o y ,  A .  M u r r a y ,  B .  N e w e l l ,  J .  P a r s l o w ,  G .  
Skyring and S. Walker 1996.  Port Phillip Bay Envi-
ronmental Study Final Report. CSIRO: Canberra, 
Australia. 
Holloway, M., and G. Jenkins 1993. The Role of Zoo-
plankton in Nitrogen and Carbon Cycling in Port 
Phillip Bay. Technical Repo rt No. 11. Port Phillip 
Bay Environmental Study. CSIRO: Canberra, Aus-
tralia.  
Kailola, P.J., M.J. Williams, P.C. Stewart, R.E. Reichelt, 
A. McNee and C. Grieve 1993. Australian Fisheries 
Resources. Bureau of Re source Sciences, Depart-
ment of Primary Industries and Energy and the 
Fisheries Research and Development Corporation: 
Canberra, Australia. 
Lee, P.G. 1994. Nutrition of  Cephalopods: Fueling the 
System. Marine Behaviour and Physiology. 25 (1-
3): 35-51. 
Murray, A., and J. Parlsow 1997. Port Phillip Bay Inte-
grated Model: Final Report. Technical Report No. 
44. Port Phillip Bay Environmental Study. CSIRO: 
Canberra, Australia. 
Nicholson, G.J., A.R. Longmore and R.A. Cowdell 1996. 
N u t r i e n t  S t a t u s  o f  t h e  S e d i m e n t s  o f  P o r t  P h i l l i p  
Bay. Technical Report No. 26. Port Phillip Bay En-
vironmental Study. CSIRO: Canberra, Australia.  
Officer, R.A., and G.D. Parry 1996. Food Webs of 
D e m e r s a l  F i s h  i n  P o r t  P h i l l i p  B a y .  T e c h n i c a l  R e -
port No. 36. Port Phillip Bay Environmental Study. 
CSIRO: Canberra, Australia. 
Parry, G.D., D.K. Hobday, D.R. Currie, R.A. Officer and 
A.S. Gason. The Distribution, Abundance and Di-
ets of Demersal Fish in Port Phillip Bay. Technical 
Report No. 21. Port Phillip Bay Environmental 
Study. CSIRO: Canberra, Australia.  
PICES Working Group 11 1998. Consumption of Ma-
rine Resources by Marine  Birds and Mammals in 
the PICES Region. 1998 Report of Working Group 
11. Sidney, Canada. Also available at 
http://pices.ios.bc.ca/wg/wgf.htm. 
Poore, G.C.B. 1992. Soft-bo ttom macrobenthos of Port 
Phillip Bay: a literature review. Technical Report 
No. 2. Port Phillip Bay Environmental Study. 
CSIRO: Canberra, Australia.  
Schmid, T. H., F.L. Murru and F. McDonald 1993. 
Feeding habits and growth rates of bull ( Carchari-
nas leucas ), sandbar ( Carcharinas plumbeus ), 
sandtiger ( Eugomphodus taurus ), and nurse 
(Ginglymostoma cirratum ) sharks. Journal of 
Aquaculture and Aquatic Sciences 5(4): 100-105.  
Wilson, R.S., B. F. Cohen and G.C.B. Poore 1993. The 
Role of Suspension-feeding and Deposit-feeding 
Benthic Macroinvertebrates in Nutrient Cycling in 
Port Phillip Bay. Technical Report No. 10. Port 
Phillip Bay Environmental Study. CSIRO: Can-
berra, Australia.
 
 
 
Page 94, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
Simulating extreme fishing polices 
in Prince William Sound, Alaska:  
a preliminary evaluation of an  
ecosystem-based policy analysis 
tool
  
 
 
Thomas A. Okey 
Fisheries Centre, UBC 
 
Abstract 
 
The biotic assemblage of Prince William Sound, Alaska 
has changed considerably during the last 35 years in re-
sponse to the great Alaska n earthquake, oceanographic 
changes, fisheries activities, the Exxon Valdez oil spill, 
and other factors. The multifactorial nature of the 
mechanisms of change in this  system make it challeng-
ing to discern their relative importance when attempt-
ing to understand troublesome trends. The manage-
ment of fisheries stands out, however, as a way of shap-
ing the state of living marine resources because fisher-
ies are controllable and they influence biotic assem-
blages. A new dynamic simulation tool in Ecopath with 
Ecosim enables comparisons of various fishing policy 
scenarios in a whole food web context according to dif-
ferent weightings of ‘econo mic,’ ‘social’ (employment), 
and ‘ecological’ considerations. A simplistic exercise in 
which a policy compromise was developed from three 
extreme polices—corresponding with optimization of 
these three objectives—enabled comparison of the find-
ings among systems featured in this volume. Optimiza-
tion of short-term economic goals and social (employ-
ment) goals in Prince Willi am Sound led to simulated 
fishing strategies that caused direct, fishery-imposed 
extinction of top predators (e.g., pinnipeds, Pacific 
halibut, and lingcod), resulting in increases in bio-
masses of two gadoid species (Pacific cod and sable-
fish), and thus the overall monetary and employment 
value of the system. Such a strategy of imposing extinc-
tions to optimize short-term economic or employment 
value is generally illegal, though perhaps operational in 
some systems throughout the world. Optimization of 
ecological considerations le d to fishing scenarios that 
increased porpoise, pinnipeds, orcas, seabirds, and 
other high trophic level pr edators, while correspond-
ingly decreasing the same two gadoid species. The po-
t e n t i a l  i m p o r t a n c e  o f  d i r e c t  t a k e  o f  p i n n i p e d s ,  a s  w e l l  
as food competition betwee n fisheries and other high 
trophic level species, is indi cated by positive responses 
of these groups to decrease s in fishing, though this 
simulated response does not imply that other sources 
of stress and mortality are unimportant to apex preda-
tors. The numerical stability of pinnipeds (the chosen 
assessment endpoint) was achieved by weighting the 
ecological considerations by  a factor of 3.2 over eco-
nomic and social considerations. Predicted reductions 
in catches by subsistence, recreational, and commercial 
fisheries by the end of all 20 year simulations were 
thought to be a function of  discounting the future dur-
ing the policy search pr ocedure through initially-
aggressive value optimization, though it may also be an 
indication that current fishing exceeds sustainable lev-
els in an ecosystem context. Predicted catch reductions 
associated with the weighted compromise were not 
considerably different than catch reductions associated 
with other options. 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Prince William Sound (PWS) is a coastal marine 
embayment situated at the northern apex of the 
Gulf of Alaska, north of latitude 60° (longitude 
146° W). Its area covers just over 9,000 km
2, or 
approximately 15 San Francisco Bay units. The 
ecological uniqueness of Prince William Sound is 
due largely to the interplay of its physical charac-
teristics with the climatic and oceanographic 
characteristics of the region. Warm moist air ar-
riving from the south becomes trapped, uplifted, 
and cooled by the surrounding Chugach Moun-
tains, releasing considerable precipitation. An-
nual rainfall ranges from 160 to 440 cm in PWS, 
and snowfall can reach 2290 cm in the surround-
ing mountains (Michelson 1989 in Wheelwright 
1994). Rain runoff and snowmelt enter from myr-
iad streams, but icebergs and glacial melt also 
contribute fresh water. Yet greater amounts of 
fresh water enter PWS as a stratified lens aloft an 
incurrent of marine water at the Hinchenbrook 
entrance. Numerous rivers and glaciers feed this 
freshwater lens as it is transported alongshore by 
the Alaska coastal current from as far south as 
British Columbia (Wheelwright 1994). Complex 
estuarine gradients and interfaces are present. 
 
The Sound’s highly variable depths (800 m 
maximum and 300 m mean; Cooney 1993, 
Loughlin 1994) relate to its origins as a sub-
merged section of the formidable Chugach Moun-
tains, which surround and frame it. The habitats 
of the sound are relatively isolated from the Gulf 
of Alaska by barrier islands and two relatively 
narrow channels. Its coastline is very convoluted, 
and in many places it drops off steeply just be-
yond a narrow shelf. Other parts of the sound 
contain extensive shallow areas, and still others 
drop vertically as the subaerial walls of fjords.   
 
Although organisms inhabiting Prince William 
Sound are reasonably  typical of sub-polar coastal 
marine environments, the biotic community is 
shaped by the ecosystem’s unique physical attrib-
utes. Examples include protection from outer 
coast wind and waves, estuarine gradients, is-
lands and heterogeneous coastlines, large inter-
tidal zones (e.g., diurnal tide range at Cordova = 
3.8 m; NOAA 1984), rocky habitats, mudflats, 
cobble beaches, steep and short spawning 
streams, fjords and their associated glaciers and 
turbidity gradients, and extreme physical season-
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 95 
ality. All of these combine to produce a unique 
and productive environment for diverse assem-
blages of marine mammals , birds, invertebrates, 
fishes, plants, and microorganisms. Longer-term 
climatic oscillations have also influenced the 
abundances of some species in the region, such as 
salmon (NRC 1996, Mantua et al. 1997).  
 
Humans began interacting with the biota of the 
Prince William Sound ecosystem approximately 
10-15 thousand years ago, soon after crossing the 
Bering Straight (Dumond and Bland 1995). The 
ecological influence of these first residents of the 
region is not well known, though they likely col-
lected clams from the intertidal and shallow ar-
eas, salmon from the many streams and rivers 
(Cooley 1961), marine mammals (e.g., Simenstad 
et al.  1978), and other fishes, invertebrates, sea-
birds, and marine algae. The first modern impacts 
to the region’s marine ecosystem came over two 
centuries ago when Russian traders and furriers 
hunted the newly discovered Steller’s sea cow 
(Hydrodamalis gigas) to biological extinction and 
the sea otter (Enhydra lutris) to ecological extinc-
tion. The removal of the sea otter undoubtedly 
triggered considerable changes in nearshore 
zones, as this species is known to exert strong 
keystone effects throughout its still expanding 
range (Estes and Palmisano 1974, Estes et al.  
1974, Dayton 1975, Simenstad et al. 1978, Kvitek 
et al. 1992, Estes and Duggins 1995). The ecologi-
cal changes caused by the extinction of the 
Steller’s Sea Cow will re main in the realm of 
speculation (e.g. Pitcher 1998). 
 
Although the activities of 20
th century Alaskan 
fishing industries are re asonably well recorded, 
their broader ecological effects are poorly known, 
as the complexity of these ecosystems prevented 
our understanding of whole food web dynamics. 
Industrial whaling targeted baleen whales be-
tween 1845 to 1966, but much of the whale bio-
mass was removed in the final years of that fish-
ery. It has been suggested that the removal of a 
large proportion of the baleen whales in Alaskan 
waters triggered cascading effects such as in-
creases in gadoid fish (e.g., through a release in 
foraging competition between juvenile pollock 
and whales; see NRC 1996). Offshore foreign 
fleets removed considerable proportions of Pacific 
herring populations from Alaskan waters during 
the first three decades after WW-II. Catches 
p e a k e d  i n  1 9 7 0  a t  o v e r  1 4 0 , 0 0 0  t⋅year
-1, then 
quickly declined by an order of magnitude (Ja-
cobson et al.1999). Pacific herring shows signs of 
gradual recovery in all Alaskan regions except for 
Prince William Sound where runs failed to return 
four years after the Exxon Valdez oil spill. Pacific 
herring is of primary commercial importance in 
PWS, and it is an important forage fish for higher 
trophic levels. Slope rockfish, particularly Pacific 
Ocean perch, were likewi se heavily exploited in 
the Gulf of Alaska region during the 1960s. They 
remain at low levels, but are said to be responding 
to conservative management (Low et al. 1999).   
 
Major changes have occurred in the PWS ecosys-
t e m  d u r i n g  t h e  l a s t  2 0  y e a r s .  R e d  k i n g  c r a b  a n d  
shrimp populations collapsed, and their fisheries 
were closed with no signs of recovery (Reeves and 
Turnock 1999); pinnipeds,  including harbor seals 
and sealions have declined steadily (e.g., Frost et 
al. 1998); and some seabirds, such as common 
murres, cormorants, and black legged cormorants 
have declined—all since the early 1980s (EVOS 
2000). In contrast, fish species such as Pacific 
cod, walleye pollock, and flatfish have increased 
considerably in the region during this same time 
period. Alaskan groundfish fisheries are fully util-
ized and overcapitalized, and the associated by-
catch of king crabs, shrimp, herring, and snow 
crabs may hinder the recovery or the resilience of 
these formerly abundant species (Low et al.  
1999). All species of salmon have increased con-
siderably during this time period. Although sev-
eral salmon hatcheries in Prince William Sound 
contribute to a large proportion of the pink 
salmon captured in the local fisheries, increased 
adult survival in the Alaska Gyre is the most likely 
reason for the record salm on runs in recent years 
(Wertheimer 1997, Heard and Anderson 1999). 
The notion that shifting oceanographic conditions 
in the region strongly influences the region’s ma-
rine community structure and is associated with 
some of the observed changes now holds consid-
erable weight (Hollowed and Wooster 1992, 
Brodeur et al. 1996, Piatt and Anderson 1996, Ty-
ler and Kruse 1996, Francis et al 1998, Rosenk-
rantz 1999).  
 
Fisheries can, nevertheless, exacerbate climate-
driven fluctuations by changing the resiliencies of 
populations to natural disturbance or stress 
(sensu Holling 1973, Sousa 1984). Insight into 
these influences can be gained by examining the 
potential forcing caused by fisheries in a system-
wide, interaction-web context. Furthermore, evi-
dence is continuing to mount that high trophic 
level predators, such as mammals and birds, can 
be adversely affected by intensive fisheries at 
lower trophic levels (e.g., Mackinson et al.  1997, 
Springer and Speckman 1997). Trites and his col-
leagues (1997), on the other hand, suggest that 
competition for food by fisheries does not gener-
ally have important detrimental effects on marine 
mammals, based on evidence that diet overlap is 
small between fisheries and marine mammals. 
The relative importance of such competition and 
Page 96, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
detrimental effects undoubtedly varies among 
ecological setting, and this question has far-
reaching implications for both fisheries and ma-
rine biota. There is also no question that design-
ing policy and analyses around the question of 
human-nonhuman competition will be con-
strained by conservation laws and subsistence-
rights laws. 
 
Most of the approximately 7,000 people in Prince 
William Sound reside either in the two Alaska Na-
tive villages, Chenega Bay and Tatitlek, or the 
three larger communities Cordova, Valdez, and 
Whittier, two of which include Alaska Native vil 
Table 1. Basic input parameters and detritus fa te for the Prince William Sound mode l, 1994-1996. TL = trophic level cal-
culated by Ecopath; OI = omnivory index indicating the degree of omnivory; P/B = production/biomass; Q/B = consump-
tion/biomass; EE = ecotrophic efficiency, expressing the proportion of the production lost to export or predation. Detritus 
fate is a percentage allocation of the remaining production between detritus pool s. (Nekton fall = dead carcases to sea 
floor.) Values in italics/light shading were calculated by Ecopath; other values are empirically-based input estimates, con-
tributed by a collaboration of experts on PWS (Okey and Pauly 1999a). 
Detritus fate (%)      
  Group  
 
Trophic 
level 
 
OI  
 
Biomass 
(t⋅km-2) 
 
P/B  
(year-1) 
 
Q/B 
(year-1) 
 
 EE  Nekton 
fall 
In-
shore 
 Off-
shore   Export  
 Transient Orca  5.4 0.01 0.001 0.05 6.04 0 1 - 50 49 
 Resident Orca  4.9 0.21 0.015 0.05 8.67 0 1 - 50 49 
 Sharks  4.5 0.98 0.662 0.10 7.00 0.753 1 - 99 - 
 Halibut  4.5 0.36 0.677 0.32 1.73 0.865 1 - 99 - 
 Porpoise  4.5 0.20 0.015 0.24 29.20 0.989 1 30 69 - 
 Pinnipeds  4.4 0.15 0.072 0.06 25.55 0.994 1 30 69 - 
 Lingcod  4.3 0.35 0.077 0.58 3.30 0.816 - 40 60 - 
 Sablefish  4.0 0.87 0.293 0.57 6.42 0.774 - - 100 - 
 Adult flounder  4.2 0.12 4.000 0.22 3.03 0.792 - - 100 - 
 Adult salmon  4.2 0.05 3.410 1.31 13.00 0.996 - 30 - 70 
 Pacific cod  4.1 0.47 0.300 1.20 4.00 0.936 - - 100 - 
 Juv flounder  4.0 0.12 0.855 0.22 3.03 0.956 - - 100 - 
 Avian raptors  3.9 2.07 0.002 0.05 36.50 0.000 - 25 - 75 
 Seabirds  3.8 0.54 0.022 0.17 150.60 0.976 - 40 40 20 
 Deep demersals  3.8 0.80 0.960 0.93 3.21 0.984 - - 100 - 
 Pollock 1+  3.8 0.24 7.480 0.71 2.56 0.998 - - 100 - 
 Rockfish  3.7 0.26 1.016 0.17 3.44 0.969 - 20 80 - 
 Baleen whales  3.7 0.16 0.149 0.05 10.90 0 1 - 99 - 
 Juv. salmon  3.5 0.31 0.072 3.91 62.80 0.969 - 30 70 - 
 Nearshore demersal 3.3 0.24 4.200 1.00 4.24 0.776 - 100 - - 
 Squid  3.3 0.01 3.000 3.00 15.00 0.940 - - 100 - 
 Eulachon  3.2 0.63 0.371 5.00 18.00 0.991 - 40 20 40 
 Sea otters  3.2 0.18 0.045 0.13 117.00 0.005 - 50 50 - 
 Deep epibenthos  3.2 0.62 30.00 3.00 10.00 0.961 - - 100 - 
 Capelin  3.1 0.02 0.367 3.50 18.00 0.999 - 50 30 20 
 Adult herring  3.1 0.01 2.810 1.54 18.00 0.962 - - 100 - 
 Pollock 0  3.1 0.01 0.110 2.34 16.18 0.945 - 50 50 - 
 Shal large epibenth.  3.1 0.03 3.100 2.10 10.00 0.750 - 80 20 - 
 Sea ducks  3.1 0.00 0.005 0.20 450.50 0 - 40 40 20 
 Sandlance  3.1 0.01 0.595 2.00 18.00 0.946 - 50 50 - 
 Juv. herring  3.0 0.01 13.406 0.73 18.00 0.985 - 30 70 - 
 Jellies  3.0 0.11 6.390 8.82 29.41 0.004 - 10 90 - 
 Deep small infauna  2.3 0.23 49.400 3.00 23.00 0.916 - - 100 - 
 Near omni-zoo  2.3 0.19 0.105 7.90 26.33 0.982 - 70 30 - 
 Omni-zooplank  2.3 0.19 24.635 11.06 22.13 0.979 - 10 90 - 
 Shal small infauna  2.2 0.18 51.500 3.80 23.00 0.941 - 100 - - 
 Meiofauna  2.1 0.11 4.475 4.50 22.50 0.950 - 20 80 - 
 Deep large infauna  2.1 0.09 28.350 0.60 23.00 0.931 - - 100 - 
 Shal small epibent  2.1 0.05 26.100 2.30 10.00 0.976 - 70 30 - 
 Shal large infauna  2.0 0.00 12.500 0.60 23.00 0.520 - 100 - - 
 Near herbi-zoo  2.0 0.00 0.136 27.00 90.00 0.978 - 70 30 - 
 Herbi-zooplankt  2.0 0.00 30.00 24.00 50.00 0.976 - 10 90 - 
 Nearshore phytopl  1.0 0.00 5.326 190.00 - 0.950 - 70 30 - 
 Offshore phytopl  1.0 0.00 10.672 190.00 - 0.950 - 10 90 - 
 Macroalgae & grass  1.0 0.00 125.250 4.00 - 0.135 - 50 50 - 
 Nekton falls  1.0 0.21 2.000 - - 0.953 - 80 20 - 
 Nearshore detritus  1.0 0.30 19.520 - - 0.542 - - 100 - 
 Offshore detritus  1.0 0.46 114.480 - - 0.587 - - - 100 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 97 
lage corporations. All of these communities rely 
on commercial fishing, though the native villages 
conduct subsistence fishing and gathering. In ad-
dition, Whittier is a growing hub of sportfishing 
activities, especially with the opening of a new 
road directly from Anchorage—Alaska’s largest 
city. Much of the economy of Valdez relies on the 
southern terminus of the trans-Alaska pipeline 
where supertankers are loaded with oil for trans-
port across the Gulf of Alaska and beyond (EVOS 
2000). Considerable changes imposed on subsis-
tence, commercial, and recreational fisheries, are 
related not only to the population fluctuations 
mentioned previously, but also due to a crash in 
the market value of wild salmon triggered by 
salmon farming (Folsom et al. 1992), and due to 
the catastrophic Exxon Valdez oil spill (see Picou 
et al. 1997). 
 
The supertanker T/V Exxon Valdez  ran aground 
on Bligh Reef in Prince William Sound causing 
the largest oil spill in United States history (over 
40 million liters of crude oil). The oil spread 
throughout central and southwestern PWS, into 
the Gulf of Alaska, along the Kenai Peninsula, 
into Cook Inlet, to Kodiak Island, and along the 
Alaska Peninsula (see Figure 2 in Paine et al.  
1996). The initial effects of the oil spill were catas-
trophic, killing several hun-
dred thousand seabirds and 
other birds of 90 species; 
3,500-5,500 sea otters; 
1,000 bald eagles, 10% of 
the world’s population of the 
threatened Kittlitz’s mur-
relet; a number of killer 
whales; 300 harbor seals, 
other marine mammals; and 
vast numbers of fish, inver-
tebrates, and plants (Lough-
lin 1994, Paine et al.  1996, 
Spies et al.  1996). Although 
the spill’s full acute effects 
will remain uncertain, there 
is little doubt that they cas-
caded and reverberated 
through the impacted sys-
tems in addition to operat-
ing directly and immedi-
ately. Even mo re uncertain 
than initial impacts are 
questions of recovery, resil-
iency, and long-term effects 
(see Okey et al., in prep.a). 
 
A mass-balance model of the 
post-spill Prince William 
Sound food web (1994-
1996) was constructed, re-
fined, and disseminated during 1998 and 1999 
(Okey and Pauly 1999a). The PWS model is avail-
able for downloading at no charge with the latest 
Ecopath with Ecosim software from 
www.ecopath.org, the derivations of its parameters 
are fully documented in Okey and Pauly (1999b), 
and the emergent characteristics of the model are 
described in greater detail in Okey et al.  (in 
prep.a). In addition, a CD ROM containing the 
model and other Alaska resources is available 
(Okey et al. 2000). 
 
The basic parameters fo r the Prince William 
Sound model are shown in Table 1. The basic in-
put parameters production/biomass (P/B) and 
consumption/biomass (Q/B) are expressed in an-
nual units. The ecotrophic efficiency (EE) is the 
proportion of production by a group consumed by 
predators or lost to export. This ratio, along with 
trophic level (TL) and omnivory index (OI), is cal-
culated by the Ecopath formulation for each spe-
cies. Detritus fate is a percentage allocation 
among detritus pools of  the unconsumed and 
unexported production of a group. Values in bold 
were calculated by Ecopath; values not bolded are 
empirically-based input estimates contributed by 
a collaboration of experts on PWS, or estimates 
that were modified to achieve thermodynamic  
Table 2. Estimates of mean annual fishery la ndings and discards in Prince Wil-
liam Sound (1994-1996). 
Landings  
(t⋅km-2⋅year-1) 
Dead discards 
(t⋅km-2⋅year-1)  
 
Group Com-
merciala 
Recrea-
tionalb 
Subsis-
tence 
Com-
mercial 
Recrea-
tionalg 
Adult salmon 5.3726 - 0.0002 - - 
Adult Pacific herring 2.5455 - - 0.0551 e - 
Pollock 1+ 0.1710 - - 0.0103 f - 
Deep epibenthos 0.1430 - - - - 
Shallow demersals 0.0700 - - 0.0001   - 
Pacific cod 0.0656 - - 0.0016   - 
Pacific halibut 0.0268 0.0423 - - 0.0015 
Sablefish 0.0184 - - 0.0008   - 
Rockfish 0.0060 0.0039 - 0.0005   0.0020 
Shallow large infauna 0.0030 - - - - 
Adult arrowtooth flounder 0.0004 - - 0.0019   - 
Deep demersal fishes 0.0003 - - 0.0023   - 
Sharks 0.0003 - - 0.0022   0.0019 
Lingcod 0.0003 0.0023 - - 0.0002 
Juv. arrowtooth flounder 0.0001 - - 0.0019   - 
Juv. Pacific herring - - - 0.1189  - 
Pinnipeds - - 0.0020 - - 
Totals 8.4234 0.0485 0.0022 0.1958 0.0037 
a) adapted from commercial landings from B. Bechtol (ADF&G, unpublished data) 
b) from Meyer (1999) 
c) from Morestad et al. (1997) 
d) from Frost (1999) 
e) based on ballpark estimates by J. Wilcox, ADF&G (pers. comm., 25 Oct 1999) 
f) based on postal surveys by Howe et al. 1995-1997 
g) group-specific discard ratios calculated from data provided by M. Furuness, NMFS 
these ratios were applied to PWS landings data provided by B. Bechtol, AKF&G 
h) from Hukbert (1999) 
Page 98, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
balance of the groups and the model (Okey and 
Pauly 1999a, b). The estimates of mean annual 
fishery landings and discards in Prince William 
Sound between 1994 and 1996 shown in Table 2 
were used as inputs in the PWS model. Monetary 
values per unit of species captured by the fisher-
ies were also input to the PWS model for the 
“economic” valuation in this analysis (Table 3). 
 
Commercial ex-vessel values are from Frenette et 
al. (1997) and these were multiplied by 10 in or-
der to derive values for recreationally captured 
fishes (as suggested by C. Walters, UBC Fisheries 
Centre, pers. comm., 20 July 2000). The esti-
mated substance value of pinnipeds used here 
($8.50⋅kg
-1) is the sum of the given edible value 
($5⋅kg-1 of seal), the hide value ($2 ⋅kg-1 of seal), 
and the craft value ($1.50 ⋅kg-1 of seal)(K. Frost, 
ADFG, pers. comm., 10 Aug 2000). The commer-
c i a l  v a l u e  o f  s a l m o n  w a s  a l s o  u s e d  a s  t h e  s u b -
stance value of salmon. 
 
A balanced trophic model of the Prince William 
Sound food web has been constructed using the 
Ecopath with Ecosim approach, but confusion ex-
ists among potential model users and decision-
makers in Alaska about the nature of the ap-
proach and its degree of usefulness for practical 
fisheries management and planning. Dynamic 
simulation routines allowing exploration of the 
potential indirect effects of specified changes in 
fishing (or disturbance) are now supplemented 
with a suite of analytical tools for fishery policy 
analysts. These new tools are designed to explore 
the potential effects and success of management 
policies on economic, social, and ecological re-
sources (Walters, this volume). Application of this 
approach to the Prince William Sound model is 
presented here as a simplistic and preliminary ex-
ercise to evaluate the efficacy of this approach for 
the future planning of Alaska’s fisheries. The cur-
rent analysis is simplistic because the contrasted 
policies are intended to represent the extremes of 
“economic,” “social,” and “ecological” objectives 
as defined by the author, for ease of comparison 
among different systems (this volume), and be-
cause the current version of the Prince William 
Sound model explicitly identifies only three broad 
fisheries categories: subsistence, recreational, and 
commercial, rather than individual gear types.  
 
Methods 
 
A comparison of hypothetical policies that opti-
mize ‘economic’, ‘social’, and ‘ecological’ consid-
erations necessitates definitions of these terms 
that are unavoidably arbitrary to some extent.  
 
The first problem is with the concept of ‘econ-
omy.’ If ‘economy’ is defined as a system or pat-
tern of resource flow, and the goal of economic 
endeavors is the “thrifty use of resources” (Mer-
riam-Webster 1995), then optimization of eco-
nomic goals on the broadest time scale and tro-
phic scales would lead to the application of nega-
tive discount rates (natural capital would be con-
sidered to increase in value over time). A broad 
definition of economy would also lead to a valua-
tion of ecosystem services that converges with, 
rather than contrasts with, ecologically-based 
valuations. However, the economic/electoral sys-
tem in the United States and throughout most of 
the world emphasizes decisions that maximize 
short-term individual self-interest, rather than 
broader scale and longer-t erm self interests. In 
order to contrast “economic” with the other two 
objectives, then, the operational concept of short-
term economic interests is  u s e d  h e r e  i n  p l a c e  o f  
the inherently broader concept of ‘economic in-
terests.’  
 
Social considerations encompass a wide spectrum 
of connections between human and natural com-
munities of Prince William Sound. Because most 
these aspects are impossible to quantify for the 
purposes of comparative analysis, one single as-
pect of social considerations — employment value 
— is used here as a proxy for this complex realm. 
Employment value is defined here as number of 
jobs per captured unit of a particular biotic group 
that is targeted by a fishery. 
 
Table 3.  Economic values assigned to exploited PWS 
groups. 
Economic values of PWS animals ($⋅kg-1)
Group Name 
Subsis-
tencea 
Recrea-
tionalb 
Comm-
ercialc  
Halibut - 60.10 6.01 
Lingcod - 39.10 3.91 
Rockfish - 39.10 3.91 
Pinnipeds 8.50 - - 
Deep epibenthos - - 5.38 
Sablefish - - 3.91 
Adult arrowtooth - - 3.91 
Pac. Cod - - 3.91 
Juvenile arrowtooth - - 3.91 
Deep demersals - - 3.91 
Pollock 1+ - - 3.91 
Nearshore demersals - - 3.91 
Adult salmon 3.75 - 3.75 
Adult herring - - 2.49 
Shallow large infauna - - 2.12 
a. The valuation of pinnipeds was based on figures provided by 
K. Frost, ADFG, pers. comm., 10 Aug 2000  
b. Recreational and sport fish values were considered to be an 
order of magnitude more valuable than commercial values 
(C. Walters, UBC Fisheries Centre, pers. comm., 20 July 
2000) 
c. Calculated from landings and ex-vessel values provided by 
Frenette et al. (1997) 
 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 99 
The quantification of ecological considera-
tions for comparison to short-term eco-
nomic and employment considerations 
also presents a potentially challenging di-
lemma. One approach is to attempt mone-
tary valuation of natural capital, based on 
ecosystem services and utilitarian as-
sumptions (e.g., Costanza et al.  1997). 
However, a less value-laden approach is to 
use inherent biological properties to opti-
mize particular qualities of interaction 
webs. Following this approach, the inverse 
of the ratio of production to biomass was 
used as a weighting factor to optimize 
food web structure and ecological quality, 
as it was considered to be a meaningful 
ecological property. This weighting factor 
(1/(P/B)) gives higher weight (“impor-
tance”) to slower-growing and longer-
lived species in the system’s interaction 
web, thus favoring ‘K-selected’ species. 
This would, in theory, maximize the number of 
trophic levels possible in the system and optimize 
the overall trophic transfer efficiency. Fishing 
strategies that lead to such ecological reconstruc-
tion would amount to ‘fishing the food web back 
up,’ rather than ‘fishing down the food web’ 
(Pauly et al.  1998). Given this  structure-based 
definition, ecological considerations are here la-
beled ‘ecosystem structure.’  
 
After developing the operational definitions of 
these three basic objectives, the policy search 
simulations were set up in Ecosim by conducting 
the following steps in addition to checking the 
appropriateness of default settings. The four spe-
cies in the model containing explicitly separated 
ontogenetic stages were linked in the ‘stage’ inter-
face, and the parameters specifying the character 
of their linkage were scrutinized. The prey vul-
nerabilities were specified to one of the three vul-
nerabilities used in this exercise (0.2, 0.4, and 
0.7). These specify the relative importance of top-
down vs. bottom-up forces influencing each in-
teraction. They can be set for individual interac-
tions, but one of the three settings was applied to 
the whole system for each of the three ‘sensitivity’ 
variants of each scenario. 
 
Although the five apex predators in the system as 
well as birds, Pacific herring, salmon, and lingcod 
exhibited dramatic positive biomass responses to 
scenarios in which ecological considerations were 
optimized, Pinnipeds proved to be the most sensi-
tive biological component of the Prince William 
Sound model with respect to declines and extinc-
tion responses. For this reason, the pinniped 
group, which consists mainly of harbor seals 
(Phocenia phoca) in Prince William Sound, was 
chosen as the ecological endpoint for develop-
ment of the weighted compromise of the more 
simplistic simulations. Numerical stabilization of 
harbor seal biomass was used as the assessment 
endpoint, and various policies were explored 
around that goal. Fishing restrictions estimated 
from this goal would represent the minimal that 
would be necessary to protect pinnipeds in Prince 
William Sound for two reasons: (1) the simula-
tions assume a pinniped population in equilib-
rium rather than accounting for the currently ob-
served decline in the PWS harbor seal population, 
and (2) the numerical stabilization goal does not 
account for any rebuilding of the harbor seal 
population that might be  deemed appropriate. 
However, indicated restri ctions in fishing are 
simplistic because of the broad categories of fish-
ing that are used, and population responses to 
limits in fishing could mean either direct or indi-
rect effects of fishing levels imposed by Ecosim, 
thus revealing only the potential for such re-
sponses in the system. 
 
The ‘non-linear search procedure for optimum 
fishing strategy over time’ was prepared for each 
scenario (e.g., Figure 1). Each search was started 
at the base fishing mort alities specified in the 
1994-1996 PWS Ecopath model. The search was 
run using the Fletch method; and the annual eco-
nomic discount rate was kept at 0.04 for all simu-
lations. The objectives (“economic,” employment, 
and ecological) were defined by entering their 
quantitative definitions (see above) into the Eco-
sim interfaces provided for employment and eco-
logical definitions (“economic” considerations are 
defined by local market values of captured species 
specified in the Ecopath model; Frenette et al.  
1997). Each search was then run according to the 
0.1
10
4 27 52 79 114 154
E valuation steps
Relative fishing
Subsistence
Recreational
Commer c ial
Figure 1. An example of a search for optimum beginning catch 
rates relative to 1994-1996 Prin ce William Sound catch rates, 
here for the weighted compromise scenario.  This procedure finds 
the ideal starting catch rates for each fishing category based on 
the specified parameters. The ending values shown here are used 
as the starting values for the 20-year dynamic policy simulation 
Page 100, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
optimized objec-
tive. In these ex-
treme simula-
tions, the opti-
mized objective 
was given a value 
of 1.0 while the 
remaining two 
were given values 
of 0.0001. All 
three objectives 
were set at 1.0 in 
the simple com-
promise scenario, 
and then multiple 
searches were 
conducted to find 
the values that achieved the assessment endpoint. 
The scenario that achieved the assessment end-
point was used as the weighted compromise. 
 
These searches for optimal fishing patterns over 
time (according to specified objectives) resulted 
in initial fishing levels that were considerably dif-
ferent from those in Prince William Sound be-
tween 1994 and 1996. For example, the new 
‘starting’ fishing rates for these hypothetical 20-
year simulations contrasted profoundly with the 
actual (1994-1996) rates (Figure 2). 
 
Starting with these new fishing strategies, which 
solved for the constraints imposed by the defined 
objectives, the simulations were run in ‘closed 
loop’ mode to simulate the dynamic interplay be-
tween fishery managers and all the biotic compo-
nents of the food web. The results of these simula-
tions were recorded by transferring run results 
onto spreadsheets. Predicted changes in relative 
biomass levels for the four main simulations (by 
t h e  e n d  o f  2 0  y e a r  r u n s )  w e r e  p l o t t e d ,  a s  w e r e  
predicted changes in catches by the three fisheries 
categories, for each optimization scenario. These 
resulting values of each of the three objectives  
were  then  compared to values resulting from 
‘open loop’ simulations in which no management 
error exists. This is further explained below.   
 
Walters (this volume) asks us to imagine a fishery 
manager who has perfect knowledge of the sys-
tem, and can instantaneously make perfect man-
agement decisions in the co ntext of goals we have 
specified be optimized. For each scenario, this 
hypothetical manager-demon can optimize speci-
fied values of living resources while losing none of 
that value to uncertainty or managerial fallibility. 
The resulting values from these perfect ‘open-
loop’ simulations are then compared with the val-
ues resulting from the dynamic ‘closed loop’ 
simulation in which information and manage-
ment decisions are simulated to be imperfect. Al-
though the formulation of this imperfectness is it-
self imperfect in Ecosim, it is imperfect in a con-
sistent way such that this method can be used to 
compare fishing categories and optimization sce-
narios. 
 
Finally, the mean of the relative temporal vari-
ability (over the 20-year simulations) of all biotic 
components was calculated for each scenario to 
investigate the sensitivity of the represented biota 
(and the overall food web) to various prey vulner-
ability settings, which control the ratio of top-
down vs. bottom-up dynamics in the system. In 
addition, the variance of the ‘system spread’ of 
the relative ending values among species was cal-
culated. The results of these sensitivity tests were 
plotted against vulnerabil ity setting and fishing 
category. 
 
Results 
 
Optimization of either short-term economic value 
or employment value, to the exclusion of other 
considerations, lead to policies that caused organ-
isms to decline or to be fished to extinction, while 
salmon and two gadoid species (i.e. Pacific gener-
ally similar trends: some upper trophic level cod 
and sablefish) of ‘upper-mid’ trophic levels in-
creased. Optimizing strictly social (employment) 
considerations lead to management strategies 
that drove halibut, lingcod, and pinnipeds to ex-
tinction, while optimizing strictly economic con-
siderations lead to strategies that drove only pin-
nipeds to extinction during the 20 year simula-
tions (Figure 3). 
 
Conversely, the scenario designed to optimize 
only ecological considerations lead to increases in 
biomass of high trophic-level predators, such as 
orcas, sharks, halibut, porpoise, pinnipeds, and  
lingcod, as well as seabirds, avian predators (ea-
gles and falcons), Pacific herring, and salmon. It 
0
4
8
12
16
Subsistence Recreational Commercial
Relatve beginning catch 
(chosen start / actual)
"Economic" optimizaton
Employment optimizaton
Ecological optimizaton
Simple compromise
Weighted compromise
Figure 2. Ratios of the new ‘starting’ catch rates to the 1994-1996 actual catch rates for the 
three identified fishing categories in PWS. Th ese new fishing rates were derived by the Eco-
sim optimization given specified economic, em ployment, and ecological objectives. Ecosim 
increased beginning subsistence catches consider ably in three of the scenarios and it in-
creased recreational catches considerably for one of the scenarios. 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 101 
also lead to decreases in the gadoids Pacific cod, 
sablefish, and Pollock, as well as decreases in the 
forage fishes eulachon, capelin, sandlance, and 
nearshore demersal fishes and rockfish (Figure 
4). 
 
Placing equal weight on all three objectives 
(short-term economic, employment, and ecologi-
cal considerations) lead to a result that was essen-
tially the same as the optimization of short-term 
economic objectives (Figure 4). The selected as-
sessment endpoint for this system (numerical 
stability of pinnipeds) was achieved only by 
weighting the ecological objectives by at least a 
factor of 3.2 over both economic and employment 
objectives; by a factor of 1.7 over short-term eco-
nomic objectives (giving no weight to employ-
ment objectives); or by a factor of 1.6 over em-
p l o y m e n t  o b j e c t i v e s  ( g i v i n g  n o  w e i g h t  t o  s h o r t -
term economic objectives). Catches were pre-
dicted to decrease considerably from the 1994-
1996 catch levels for every optimization scenario 
and for every fisheries category, with the excep-
tion of the recreational catch in the employment 
simulation, which remained at 1994-1996 levels 
(Figure 5).  
 
The relative success of managing the optimization 
of “economic,” employment, and social values 
varied according to objective. When managing for 
the goal of ecosystem structure, the hypothetical 
human fisheries manager enjoyed near perfect 
success relative to the perfect Walters’ demon, 
but the ecological optimization was the only sce-
0
1
2
Transient Orca
Resident Orca
Sharks
Halibut
Porpoise
Pinnipeds
Lingcod
Sablefish
Adult Atooth
Adult Salmon
Pac. Cod
Juv . Atooth.
Avian Predators
Seabirds
Deep demersals
Pollock 1+
Rockfish
Baleen Whales
Salmon Fry 0-12
Nshore Demersal
Eulachon
Capelin
Adult Herring
Pollock 0
Shal Lg Epibent
Sandlance
Juv.  Herring
Jellies
Predicted change (end / start)
Short-term economic goals
Employment goals
 
Figure 3. Predicted changes in biomass of medi um and high trophic level species by the end of a 20 year simulation 
designed to optimize short-term economic goals and a 20 year simulation designed to optimize employment goals. 
The 28 most responsive species out of a total of 49 groups are presented in decreasing trophic order from left to right. 
Most of the unresponsive groups were in lower trophic levels (not included in this figure). 
0
1
2
3
Transient Orca
Resident Orca
Sharks
Halibut
Porpoise
Pinnipeds
Lingcod
Sablefish
Adult Atooth
Adult Salmon
Pac. Cod
Juv. Atooth.
Avian Predators
Seabirds
Deep demersals
Pollock 1+
Rockfish
Baleen Whales
Salmon Fry 0-12
Nshore Demersal
Eulachon
Capelin
Adult Herring
Pollock 0
Shal Lg Epibent
Sandlance
Juv.  Herring
Jellies
Predicted change (end / start)
Ecological goals
Weighted compromise
 
 
Figure 4. Predicted changes in biomass of medi um and high trophic level species by the end of a 20 year simulation 
designed to optimize ecological goals presented with a 20  year ‘weighted-compromise‘ si mulation designed to meet 
the assessment endpoint of pinniped population stability. The predicted porpoise increase after 20 years exceeds the 
scale at 3.84 times the 1994-1996 level. The 28 most responsive species, out of a total of 49 groups, are presented here 
in descending trophic order from left to right. Most of the unrespon sive groups were in lowe r trophic levels (not in-
cluded in this figure). 
Page 102, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
nario with essentially perfect overall managerial 
success (Table 4). In contrast, the simulated hu-
man manager was far from perfectly successful at 
meeting the ‘economic’ and employment value 
goals set by Walter’s demon. The overall success 
of the weighted com-
promise was also rela-
tively high because eco-
system  
structure was heavily 
weighted in that sce-
nario (Table 4). 
 
Both sensitivity meas-
ures — the means of the 
20-year temporal vari-
ances of the biomasses 
of all biotic groups, and 
the whole-system 
‘spread’ of the ending 
biomasses relative to 
the beginning bio-
masses – increased 
considerably when the 
prey vulnerability set-
tings were set at 0.7 
than when they were 
set at 0.2 or 0.4.  The 
increases in the vari-
ance values between 
the 0.4 and 0.7 were 
relatively dramatic in 
almost all of the simu-
lations, indicating a 
non-linear relationship 
of sensitivity of the 
model to vulnerability 
settings (Figures 6 and 
7).  
Discussion 
 
Although the 
Prince William 
Sound model is 
among the most 
explicit Ecopath 
models with re-
spect to articula-
tion of biotic 
groups (Okey and 
Pauly 1999 a, b), 
the fisheries in-
formation is cur-
rently aggregated 
into subsistence, 
recreational, and 
commercial cate-
gories rather than 
into more specific 
gear types. This broad approach to fisheries 
parameterization enables an equally  broad view 
of the interaction of fishing sectors, biota, and 
policy, and the results are intriguing and informa-
Table 4. Comparison of economic, employment, and ecosystem values resulting from 
management of Prince William Sound fisheries by the hypothetical Walters’ demon (a 
manager who has perfect information and make s perfect decisions). These are compared 
with values resulting from management de cisions of a simulated fallible human man-
ager. Values displayed represent resulting values after 20 years of management with each 
approach. The success of achieving ecosystem structure goals is essentially 1.0 in ever y
optimization, indicating that no knowledge is  needed to optimize ecosystem structure, 
and most the actions necessary are removals of human interaction (i.e. fishing). 
 
Optimization goals Walters' demon 
(perfect decisions) 
Chasing Walters' 
demon (‘human’ 
decisions) 
Success index 
‘Economic’ optimization    
 Net short-term econ value 1262.28 908.29 0.72 
 Employment (social) value 1576.26 1077.98 0.68 
 Ecosystem structure 3164.3 3151.47 1.00 
  Overall value 1.1 0.79 0.72 
Employment optimization    
 Net short-term econ value 748.59 724.8 0.97 
 Employment (social) value 1767.83 1181.43 0.67 
 Ecosystem structure 2829.95 2841.82 1.00 
  Overall value 1.23 0.82 0.67 
Ecological optimization    
 Net short-term econ va lue 257.17 192.79 0.75 
 Employment (social) value 290.78 211.72 0.73 
 Ecosystem structure 4368.31 4364.67 1.00 
  Overall value 1.32 1.32 1.00 
Simple compromise    
 Net short-term econ value 1261.65 885.51 0.70 
 Employment (social) value 1590.69 1057.93 0.67 
 Ecosystem structure 3145.53 3133.33 1.00 
  Overall value 3.16 2.45 0.78 
Weighted compromise    
 Net short-term econ value 1117.62 796.96 0.71 
 Employment (social) va lue 1364.57 928.08 0.68 
 Ecosystem structure 3512.67 3490.11 0.99 
  Overall value 5.32 4.71 0.89 
0
1
2
Subsistence Recreational Commercial
Relatve ending catch 
(20 year end / actual)
"Economic" optimizaton
Employment optimizaton
Ecological optimizaton
Simple compromise
Weighted compromise
Figure 5. Differences in catches between the actual 1994-1996 levels and the catch levels 
predicted end of the 20 year simulation. A more  explicit specification of gear types in the 
model might have lead to predicted catch incr eases in some groups, but the same general 
trend would be expected. Considerable decreases in catches might have resulted from ag-
gressive initial catch levels in order to maximize values early based on the algorithm of the 
p o l i c y  s e a r c h  p r o c e d u r e  i n  E c o s i m ,  b u t  i t  a l s o  m a y  i n d i c a t e  t h a t  1 9 9 4 - 1 9 9 6  c a t c h  l e v e l s  
were higher than sustainable in an ecosystem context.
 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 103 
tive on this broad level. However, recognizing the 
generalized scale of this fisheries parameteriza-
tion is crucial for unambiguous interpretations. 
More explicit articulation of fisheries information 
(i.e., by specific gear type) would lead to policy 
solutions in which Ecosim could control 
individual gear types independently. This would 
undoubtedly lead to different specific outcomes 
for individual biotic groups and individual fisher-
ies, though the general patterns would likely be 
unchanged from the cu rrent more general changed from the current more general 
approach. 
 
The present Ecosim policy analysis of the 
Prince William Sound Ecopath model in-
dicates some exceptions to the conclusion 
of Trites et al. (1997) that competition be-
tween fisheries and marine mammals gen-
erally do not stress marine mammal popu-
lations. The positive responses in Figure 4 
indicate notable population effects of com-
petition between several high trophic level 
species and local fisheries; and these fish-
eries are thought to be of relatively 
moderate intensities. However, the dis-
tinction between indirect (competitive) 
forcing and direct fishery effects is a cru-
cial first step to interpreting the results of 
these simulations. In general, transient 
orcas, resident orcas, porpoise, sharks, 
seabirds, and avian predators (eagles and 
falcons) responded as negatively-affected 
competitors of fisheries for food (see  in-
creases when fisheries are decreased; Fig-
ure 4) while halibut, pinnipeds, lingcod, 
salmon, and herring responded as nega-
tively-affected, direct targets of fisheries 
(see responses in Figures 3 and 4). The 
gadid-like fishes sablefish and Pacific cod 
acted like positively-affected targets of 
fisheries—species that are generally facili-
tated by fisheries.  The negative responses 
of nearshore demersals to decreased fish-
ing (Figure 4) is probably the result of in-
creased competition with salmon fry and 
herring as the latter populations recover. 
 
These simulations pre-suppose an isolated 
system, though constant immigration and 
emigration rates can be specified. Isolation 
is a useful assumption for examining po-
tential trophic forces within the system, but 
the results of such simulations should al-
ways be interpreted in the context of larger 
regional changes, which affect the system. 
This is particularly important when exam-
ining results of characteristically trans-
boundary species, such as forage fishes and 
transient predators. As a simple hypotheti-
cal example, the real trend in forage fishes 
such as capelin and sandlance might be to in-
crease because  of  factors  external  to  the  PWS 
system, discussed later in relation to observed 
pinniped declines. 
 
The pinniped group (mostly harbor seals) was 
chosen as the ecological endpoint for this study 
because that group was most sensitive to the pre-
defined policy scenarios. Two other high preda-
0
2
4
6
8
0.2 0.4 0.7
Prey vulnerability setting
Mean temporal variance
(t/km2)
"Economic" goals
Employment
Ecosystem structure
Simple compromise
Weighted compromise
Figure 6.  The means of the 20 year temporal variances of the 
biomass of all biotic groups according to optimization scenario 
and vulnerability setting. This se nsitivity test shows a consider-
able increase in mean temporal variances between the prey vul-
nerability settings of 0.4 and 0.7, indicating that the dynamic be-
havior of the model is stable at ov erall prey vulnerabilities of 0.4, 
but not as stable at 0.7. The value of the bar that exceeds the scale 
is 39. The results presented in this paper were from simulations 
run with vulnerabilit
y settings of 0.4 
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.2 0.4 0.7
Prey vulnerability s etting
Sys tem s pread 
(endng anomoly variance)
"Economic" goals
Employment
Ecosystem structure
Simple compromise
Weighted compromise
Figure 7. Results of an additional sensitivit y test, similarly sho w-
ing a considerable increase in the relative “system spread” at the 
end of the 20 year simulations. This ‘whole system’ variance de-
scribes the overall change of the food web as forced by simulated 
trophic interactions. 
Page 104, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
tors in the system, halibut and lingcod, were 
fished to extinction alongside pinnipeds in the 
simulation designed to optimize employment 
goals. The explanation for these three extinctions 
is that Ecosim optimized the system’s employ-
ment goals by eliminating the competitors of the 
fisheries for the prey—sablefish, salmon, and Pa-
cific cod—which hold higher employment value in 
the system (This implies that pinnipeds, halibut, 
and lingcod consume fish desired by the fisheries; 
it does not imply that these three predators can-
not presently find enough to eat, or even that the 
three prey species in question are the primary 
prey of pinnipeds). Subs istence catches were in-
creased by a factor of 12 to eliminate pinnipeds 
quickly. That would not be  allowed in the current 
pinniped co-management regime. The sustain-
ability of the current subsistence take of pin-
nipeds was not evaluated here.  
 
The abundances of sablefish, salmon, and Pacific 
cod increased when their natural predators were 
reduced or eliminated because their natural mor-
talities decreased, enabling fishing mortalities 
(and employment) to increase. The three higher 
predators were essentially  sacrificed by an em-
ployment-minded Walters’ demon because their 
prey hold much higher employment value, being 
lower in the food web and containing much 
higher biomasses. This strategy for employment 
(and economic) optimization conducted by Eco-
sim is illegal, and would not be undertaken by 
fisheries managers in the region; but it is impor-
tant that this incentive-driven strategy for ‘fishing 
down the food web’ is here revealed by Ecosim, as 
this mechanism likely operates in the real world, 
albeit sometimes by default (by accident) rather 
than on purpose.  
 
In the real world, as fisheries shift toward lower 
trophic level targets, direct pressures on the high-
est-level predators might ease short of biological 
extinctions, but these populations would become 
more vulnerable to food and disease stress after 
their targeted prey decrease in abundance. The 
reduction of these high level predators in the sys-
tem can thereby be driven from above (direct 
fisheries effects) and from  below (indirect fisher-
ies effects and oceanographic-driven changes in 
system production). The true reason for pinniped 
declines in Prince William Sound and the sur-
rounding region is still ambiguous, but there is 
g o o d  e v i d e n c e  t h a t  f o o d  s t r e s s  i s  n o t  a  f a c t o r  i n  
those declines (K. Frost, ADFG, pers. comm., 10 
August 2000; and discussed later). 
 
The optimization of ‘economic’ goals was 
achieved by the same strategy of increasing abun-
dances of some upper-mid trophic level fishes 
through the reduction or elimination of top 
predators, but in this case the goal was to achieve 
the highest monetary flow from the overall system 
rather than employment opportunity. The pat-
terns and the mechanisms were similar to those 
in the employment simulation (Figure 3). In both 
cases, resident orcas increase slightly rather than 
decrease because their salmon and herring prey 
increase and fisheries cannot kill them (in the 
model); transient orcas, however, decrease be-
cause their mammal prey decreases in these two 
scenarios.  
 
Examination of Figure 4 is still more informative 
about the state of the Prince William Sound food 
web. The analysis predicts that managing for the 
optimization of purely ecological goals, as pres-
ently defined, leads to a system in which the high 
level predators become considerably more abun-
dant after 20 years while some mid-level fishes 
decrease (though both ontogenetic stages of 
salmon and herring increase). Furthermore, the 
only two groups to decrease out of the 15 highest 
trophic levels in the system are sablefish and Pa-
cific cod. The 16
th group, walleye pollock older 
than one year, is decreased from their original 
biomass like the two other gadoids in the sys-
tem—sablefish and Pacific cod.  
 
The increases, or ‘recovery’, of these species indi-
cates either a release from competition for food or 
a release from direct take, which differs among 
species. For example, harbor seals are likely to be 
responding to decreases in  direct mortality. But 
this rebounding assumes that no external factors 
might prevent recovery of these species, such as 
lingering pollution associated with the Exxon 
Valdez oil spill,  increasing fluxes of predators 
from other systems, or a major shift in the diets of 
predators. Prey switching is incorporated in Eco-
sim, but even small deviations of predicted prey 
switching from real world scenarios can make a 
significant difference for sea otter, porpoise, or 
harbor seal populations because, for example, 
Orcas are capable of consuming considerable 
quantities (Estes et al. 1998). The achievement of 
these ecological policy goals was predicted to con-
tain no human error. That is to say, the simulated 
‘human’ manager enjoyed virtually 100% success 
relative to the ecological Walters’ demon, which 
had perfect information and made perfect deci-
sions (Table 4). 
 
These results provide three main insights: (1) op-
timization of ecological goals carries no associ-
ated management error because the only actions 
required to achieve those ecological goals are re-
ductions in human interactions with the ecosys-
tem (assuming the system does not stabilize at a 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 105 
degraded alternate state); (2) if a reduction of ex-
otic disturbances such as modern industrial fish-
ing and oil spills would really favor ‘K-selected’ 
species, as disturbance theory suggests, the re-
bounding of upper trophic levels shown in Figure 
4 indicates that the Prince William Sound food 
web is considerably degraded, but has the poten-
tial to recover (this interp retation would be in er-
ror for species exposed to sources of mortality 
that are not included in the model. Pinnipeds 
might be one example of this); (3) both ontoge-
netic stages of salmon and herring are necessary 
for recovery of high trophic level species, and sys-
tem integrity. These four groups increased in the 
‘ecological optimization’ despite being weighted 
relatively low when specifying the ecological con-
siderations (they have relatively high P/Bs).   
 
A fourth interpretation that is more speculative 
and contentious is that gadoid fishes, such as 
sablefish, Pacific cod, and walleye pollock are 
‘weedy’ species whose elevated abundances in this 
system indicate modification of the system by 
fishing. This interpretation would lump gadoid 
fishes with species that become abundant in 
stressed systems, such as capitellid polychaetes in 
polluted sediment (Pearson and Rosenberg 1978), 
polychaetes in frequently trawled areas of the sea 
floor (Engle and Kvitek 1998), or Eurasian weed 
plants in disturbed soil throughout the “neo-
european” colonies (Crosby 1986). Evidence con-
trary to this notion includes arctic areas that have 
high abundances of gadoids in the absence of 
human fishing, and areas like the George’s Banks 
in the western north Atlantic where the abun-
dance of cod was unbelievable to newly arrived 
Europeans (K. Frost, ADFG, pers. comm., 10 Au-
gust 2000; and discussed later). 
 
It was not surprising that the weighted compro-
mise scenario in which ecological goals were 
weighted 3.2 times both the “economic” and em-
ployment goals revealed a pattern similar to the 
ecological optimization pattern, though less ex-
treme. Although this weighted compromise might 
not be ubiquitously viewed as an effective com-
promise, it achieves the goal of numerical stabili-
z a t i o n  o f  p i n n i p e d s ,  i d e n t i f i e d  p r e v i o u s l y  a s  t h e  
assessment endpoint. However, such allocational 
discomfort can be replaced by systemic discom-
fort upon scrutiny of Figure 5, which shows that 
Ecosim not only decreased allocation to all fishing 
categories in almost all scenarios by the end of the 
20-year simulations, but it shows that the fishing 
solution associated with the weighted compro-
mise is within the range of the fishing decreases 
in the “economic” and employment optimiza-
tions. The consistent reduction of catch in all 
cases is another indicator that catch rates are 
generally too high to optimize anything in the 
Prince William Sound system.   
 
Good evidence suggests that the declining popula-
tion of pinnipeds in Prince William Sound is not 
limited by food (K. Frost, ADFG, pers. comm., 10 
August 2000). The current simulation indicates 
that direct take in the subsistence fishery is a po-
tentially critical source of pinniped mortality in 
the system, but the adju stments to the subsis-
tence fishery that were necessary to achieve the 
weighted compromise were over-simplified be-
cause different subsistenc e fishing practices were 
aggregated into a single fishing category. Specifi-
cation of fishing types at a finer resolution would 
allow the adjustment of direct pinniped take to be 
separate from other subsistence categories when 
exploring extreme policy scenarios. The reasons 
for the observed long-term decline in harbor seals 
in Prince William Sound and the surrounding re-
gion are uncertain, but the direct take of pin-
nipeds in Prince William Sound may be a much 
less important factor than predation by transient 
orcas or sharks (K. Frost, ADFG, pers. comm., 10 
August 2000), which may have shifted feeding 
patterns in response to declines in other food 
throughout their broader ranges (e.g., Estes et al. 
1998).  
 
Questions of the relative importance of the vari-
ous factors that may drive currently observed 
pinniped declines could be addressed by combin-
ing Ecopath approaches with other approaches in 
the future, but these questions are beyond the 
scope of the present analysis. The important point 
here is that Ecopath’s solution to sacrifice pin-
nipeds and other high trophic-level predators in 
order to optimize the extreme “economic” and 
employment objectives was illegal, but revealing 
of incentives that might drive real dynamics in 
this or other systems. The problem of renegade 
solutions confronted in this analysis helped initi-
ate the development of a ‘mandated re-building’ 
input interface in the upcoming version of Eco-
sim’s policy analysis package (V. Christensen, 
UBC Fisheries Centre, pers. comm., 29 August 
2000).  
 
The reliability and usefulness of the solutions and 
predictions presented in this paper depend on the 
quality of the parameters used to represent the 49 
categories in the model of the PWS food web. The 
derivations of these parameters are fully docu-
mented in Okey and Pauly (1999b). They also de-
pend on the aggregation of the model and of the 
fisheries information (discussed above and in 
Okey and Pauly 1999 a, b). Finally, they depend 
upon the behavior and dynamic stability of the 
model. A variety of approaches can be taken to 
Page 106, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
evaluate this behavior and dynamic stability. The 
approach taken here is based on the assumption 
t h a t  f o o d  w e b s  a r e  i n h e r e n t l y  s t a b l e  i n  t h e  r e a l  
world within the context of endemic regimes of 
production and natural disturbances, and like-
wise the mixture of top-down and bottom-up 
forces that are particular to that setting. The 
range of prey vulnerability settings explored dur-
ing the sensitivity test represents these different 
regimes of top-down and bottom-up forces. The 
sensitivity of the results of the model is illustrated 
by the weighted compromise; the weighting value 
of 3.25 lead to stability of pinnipeds when a vul-
nerability setting (V) of 0.4 was used, but V = 0.2 
lead to a gradual rise of pinnipeds over the 20 
year simulation while V = 0.7 lead to their extinc-
tion at approximately the 20 year horizon. 
 
The observed non-linear increase of the system 
variance values as vulnerability settings were in-
creased from 0.2 to 0.7 implies onset of instability 
at high vulnerability settings, as expected. The 
goal of the sensitivity test was to choose a vulner-
ability setting that does not exceed the level asso-
ciated with (unrealistic) instability, though some 
instability should be expected, especially in a sys-
tem modified by exotic disturbances, and espe-
cially for species at high trophic levels. Organisms 
at high trophic levels would have the most plastic 
(adaptive) behaviors giving individuals the ability 
to adapt behaviorally to changing ecological and 
food-web conditions. The discovery of instability 
at this level of the food web at high vulnerabilities 
is simply an indicator that the intelligence and so-
ciality of these high trophic animals are incom-
pletely captured by the model, and this is not sur-
prising. An alternate explanation is that real in-
stabilities occur in the u pper trophic levels of sys-
tems that are exposed to persistent or strong 
stress, particularly wher e exotic stresses have 
b e e n  p r e v a l e n t ,  a s  i n  P r i n c e  W i l l i a m  S o u n d .  I n  
this sense, ‘instable’ behaviors of high trophic lev-
els would be consistent with real world dynamics.  
 
Notwithstanding these considerations, no severe 
instabilities were revealed in the PWS model, just 
a non-linear trend in va lues for mean temporal 
variances and the variance among the 20 year 
ending values of the whole system (Figures 6 and 
7). In spite of the relative stability of the PWS 
model, a reasonably low vulnerability setting 0.4 
was chosen for the simulations. This value was 
chosen in the interest of interpretive conserva-
tism, as low vulnerability values emphasize the 
prevalence of bottom-up forces in the system 
rather than top-down forces. Still, the results of 
the Prince William Sound model, or any Ecopath 
model, tend to over state the operational impor-
tance of competitive interactions in the system 
because non-biotic, physical forcing is tradition-
ally underemphasized in Ecopath models. The 
point of this type of dynamic modeling, however, 
is to reveal the potential biotic forces in the sys-
tem, which can then be interpreted in the context 
of non-biotic forces. 
 
The results of these preliminary and exploratory 
analyses of extreme fishery management policy 
alternatives in Prince William Sound, with the 
development of a weighted compromise, indicate 
that the PWS food web may be currently fished at 
or beyond the limits of sustainability, in the con-
text of the whole food web. They indicate this for 
any objective defined here including “economic,” 
employment, or ecological goals and the simple 
and weighted compromise developed within the 
constraints of aggregated fisheries information. 
One caveat to this gloomy implication is that the 
model of Prince William Sound represents a post-
oil spill scenario (the state of the system 5-7 years 
after the spill). It follows that a system degraded 
by a catastrophic oil spill might not be able to sus-
tain the intensity of fishing that would be ex-
pected or hoped for. Similar analyses on a pre-
spill Prince William Sound system, if a compara-
ble model existed, might reveal far more sustain-
able values of these living resources, whether the 
values in question are  economic, social, or eco-
l o g i c a l .  I t  i s  s o m e w h a t  surprising and notable, 
however, that the sacrifices from the fisheries sec-
tors required to provide pinnipeds with the 
minimum safeguard from extinction in the sys-
tem (numerical stabilit y at the present level 
through the weighted compromise) are not ap-
preciably more severe than  would b e r eq uir ed t o  
meet the other objectives explored in this analysis 
(Figure 5). It is vitally important to emphasize 
again that more explicit articulation of fishery 
sectors in this analysis would have produced 
more informative results with respect to specific 
fishing activities. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
The Prince William Sound food web model was con-
structed by a broad collaboration of experts represent-
ing large teams of scientists and students. The main ac-
tive contributors of this knowledge are listed in the 
aforementioned citations documenting the model’s 
construction. K. Frost’s comments were particularly 
helpful with the interpretations of the analyses, though 
agreement was incomplete. We thank the Exxon Valdez 
Oil Spill Trustee Council for supporting the construc-
tion of this model. We than k Professor D. Pauly for his 
excellent leadership and D. Priekshot and J. Dalsgaard 
for laying crucial groundwo rk for the model construc-
tion. We also thank Professor S. Pimm and B. Powell 
from the University of Tenn essee for helpful criticism 
of the PWS model. Finally, Professor C. Walters devel-
oped Ecosim, and V. Christensen developed its easy-to-
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 107 
understand software package.  
References 
 
Brodeur, R. D., B. W. Frost, S. R. Hare, R. C. Francis, 
and W. J. Ingraham, Jr. 1996. Interannual varia-
tions in zooplankton biomass in the Gulf of Alaska 
and covariation with California current zooplank-
ton biomass. California Cooperative Oceanic Fish-
eries Investigations Reports (37): 80-100. 
Cooley, R. A. 1961. Decline of Alaska’s salmon: a case 
study in resource conser vation policy. Ph.D. dis-
sertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor. 
Cooney, R.T. 1993. A theoretical evaluation of the car-
rying capacity of Prince William Sound, Alaska, for 
juvenile Pacific salmon. Fisheries Research 18: 77-
87.  
Crosby, A. W. 1986. Ecological Imperialism. Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge. 
Costanza, R., R. d’Arge, R. de Groot, S. Farber, M. 
G r a s s o ,  B .  H a n n a n ,  K .  L i m b e r g ,  S .  N a e e m ,  R .  V .  
O’Neill, J. Paruelo, R. G. Raskin. P. Sutton, and M. 
van den Belt 1997. The value of the world’s ecosys-
tem services and natural capital. Nature 387: 253-
260. 
Dayton, P. K. 1975. Experimental studies of algal can-
opy interactions in a se a otter-dominated kelp 
community at Amchitka Island, Alaska. Fishery 
Bulletin 73: 230-237. 
Dumond, D. E., and R. L. Bland. 1995. Holocene pre-
history of the northernmost north Pacific. Journal 
of World Prehistory 9(4): 401-451. 
Engle, J. and R. Kvitek. 199 8. Effects of otter trawling 
on a benthic community in Monterey Bay National 
Marine Sanctuary. Conservation Biology 12(6): 
1204-1214 
Estes, J. A. et al. 1998. Killer whale predation on sea ot-
ters linking oceanic and nearshore ecosystems. 
Science 282: 473-476. 
Estes, J. A., and D.O. Duggins. 1995. Sea otters and 
kelp forests in Alaska: generality and variation in a 
community ecological paradigm. Ecological Mono-
graphs 65(1):75-100. 
Estes, J. A. and J. F. Palm isano. 1974. Sea otters: their 
role in structuring nearshore communities. Science 
185:1058-60. 
Estes, J. A., N. S. Smith, and J. F. Palmisano. 1974. Sea 
otter predation and community organization in the 
western Aleutian Islands. Ecology 59: 822-833. 
EVOS Trustee Council. 2000. GEM Science Program 
NRC Review Draft. Prepared by the Exxon Valdez 
Oil Spill Truste Council, April 21, 2000. 
F r a n c i s ,  R .  C . ,  S .  R .  H a r e ,  A .  B .  H o l l o w e d ,  a n d  W .  S .  
Wooster. 1998. Effects of interdecadal climate 
variability on oceanic ecosystems of the northeast 
Pacific. Fisheries Oceanography 7(1): 1-21. 
Frenette, B., M. Mcnair, and H. Savikko. 1997. Catch 
and production in Alaska’s commercial fisheries, 
1 9 9 5  E d i t i o n .  A l a s k a  D e p a r t m e n t  o f  F i s h  a n d  
Game, Commercial Fisher ies Management and 
Development Division, Special Publication 11. 
F r o s t ,  K .  J . ,  L .  F .  L o w r y ,  a n d  J .  M .  V e r  H o e f .  1 9 9 8 .  
Monitoring, habitat use and trophic interactions of 
harbor seals in Prince William Sound. Restoration 
Project 97064, Annual Report. Anchorage, Alaska: 
Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Restoration Office. 
Frost, K. J. 1999. Pinnipeds. In  T.A. Okey and D. Pauly 
(eds). Trophic mass-bala nce model of Alaska’s 
Prince William Sound ecosystem, for the post-spill 
period 1994-1996, 2
ndEdition.  University of Brit-
ish Columbia, Vancouver,  Fisheries Centre Re-
search Reports 7(4), 136 pp. 
Folsom, W., D. Altman, A. Manuar, F. Neilson, T. 
Tevord, E. Sandborn, and M. Wildman. 1992. 
World salmon culture. National Oceanic and At-
mospheric Administration Technical Memoran-
dum NMFS-F/SPO-3, 323 pp. 
Heard, W. R., A. M. Anderson. 1999. Alaska Salmon. in 
Our Living Oceans. Report on the status of U.S. 
living marine resources, 1999. U.S. Dep. Commer., 
NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-F/SPO-41. 
Holling, C. S. 1973. Resilience and stability in ecological 
systems. Ann. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 4: 1-23. 
Hollowed, A. B. and W. S. Wooster. 1992. Variability of 
winter ocean conditions and strong year classes of 
Northeast Pacific groundfish. Pp. 433-444. ICES 
Marine Science Symposium. 
Howe, A. L., G. Fidler, C. Olnes, A. E. Bingham, and M. 
J. Mills. 1997. Harvest, ca tch, and participation in 
Alaska sport fisheries du ring 1996. Alaska De-
partment of Fish and Ga me, Fishery Data Series 
No. 97-29, Anchorage. 
H u l b e r t ,  L .  1 9 9 9 .  S h a r k s .  i n  T . A .  O k e y  a n d  D .  P a u l y  
(eds.).  Trophic mass-balance model of Alaska’s 
Prince William Sound ecosystem, for the post-spill 
period 1994-1996, 2
ndEdition.  University of Brit-
ish Columbia, Vancouver,  Fisheries Centre Re-
search Reports 7(4), 136 p. 
Jacobson, L. D., F. C. Funk, and B. J. Goiney. Pacific 
coast and Alaska pelagic fisheries. in Our Living 
Oceans. Report on the status of U.S. living marine 
resources, 1999. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. 
Memo. NMFS-F/SPO-41. 
K v i t e k ,  R .  G . ,  J .  S .  O l i v e r ,  A .  R .  d e  G a n g e ,  a n d  B .  S .  
Anderson. 1992. Changes in Alaskan soft-bottom 
prey communities along a gradient in sea otter 
predation. Ecology 73(2): 413-428.  
Loughlin, T. R. (ed.). 19 94. Marine Mammals and the 
Exxon Valdez. Academic Press, Inc. San Diego. 395 
p. 
Low, L., J. N. Ianelli, S. A. Lowe. 1999. Alaska ground-
fish fisheries. in Our Living Oceans. Report on the 
status of U.S. living marine resources, 1999. U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-F/SPO-
41. 
Mantua, N. J., S. R. Hare, Y. Zhang, J. M. Wallice, and 
R. C. Francis. 1997. A Pacific interdecadal climate 
oscillation with impacts on salmon production. 
Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 
78(6): 1069-1079. 
Merriam-Webster. 1995. Merriam Webster’s Pocket 
dictionary. Merriam-Webster Inc., Springfield, 
Massachusetts, 405 pp. 
Meyer, S. 1999. Recreational landings in PWS. in T.A. 
Okey and D. Pauly (eds.) .  Trophic mass-balance 
model of Alaska’s Prince  William Sound ecosys-
tem, for the post-spill period 1994-1996, 
2
ndEdition.  University of British Columbia, Van-
couver, Fisheries Centre Research Reports 7(4), 
136 pp. 
Morstad, S., D. Sharp, J. Wilcock and J. Johnson. 1997. 
Prince William Sound Ma nagement Area 1996. 
Annual Finfish Management Report. Alaska De-
Page 108, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
partment of Fish and Ga me. Commercial Fisheries 
Management and Development Division, Central 
Region, Anchorage, Alaska.  
NOAA. 1984. http://www.co-ops.nos.noaa.gov/ bench-
marks/9454050.html 
NRC. 1996. The Bering Sea Ecosystem, National Re-
search Council, National Academy Press, Washing-
ton, DC 
Okey, T. A., C. Young, A. Poon, D. Pauly 2000. Alaska’s 
Aquatic Ecosystems CD-ROM, Fisheries Centre, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver BC, 
www.fisheries.ubc.ca 
Okey, T.A. and D. Pauly.  1999a.  A mass-balanced 
model of trophic flows in Prince William Sound: 
De-compartmentalizing ecosystem knowledge, p. 
621-635.  In  Ecosystem approaches for fisheries 
management.  University of Alaska Sea Grant, AK-
SG-99-01. 
O k e y ,  T . A .  a n d  D .  P a u l y  ( e d i t o r s ) .   1 9 9 9 b .   T r o p h i c  
mass-balance model of Alaska’s Prince William 
Sound ecosystem, for the post-spill period 1994-
1996, 2 ndEdition.  University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Fisheries Ce ntre Research Reports 
7(4), 136 pp. 
Okey, T. A. (other authors to  be determined) D. Pauly. 
(in prep.a) Can oil spills shift marine ecosystems to 
alternate stable states?: simulations with an Eco-
path model of Prince Willi am Sound, Alaska. (Tar-
get journal: Ecological Applications). 
Paine, R.T., J.L. Ruesink, A.  Sun, E.L. Soulanille, M.J. 
Wonham, C.D.H. Harley, D.R. Brumbaugh, and 
D.L. Secord. 1996. Trouble on oiled waters: lessons 
from the Exxon Valdez  oil spill. Ann. Rev. Ecol. 
Syst. 27: 197-235. 
P a u l y ,  D . ,  V .  C h r i s t e n s e n ,  J .  D a l s g a a r d ,  R .  F r o e s e ,  F .  
Torres, Jr. 1998. Fishing down marine food webs. 
Science 279(5352): 860-863. 
Pearson, T. H., and R. Rosenberg. 1978. Macrobenthic 
succession in relation to  organic enrichment and 
pollution of the marine environment. Oceano-
graphic and Marine Biology Annual Review 16: 
229-311. 
Piatt, J. F. and P. Anders on. 1996. Response of com-
mon murres to the Exxon Valdez oil spill and long-
term changes on the Gulf of Alaska marine ecosys-
tem. Pages 720-737 in S. D. Rice, R. B. Spies, D. A. 
W o l f ,  a n d  B .  A .  W r i g h t  ( e d s )  P r o c e e d i n g s  o f  t h e  
Exxon Valdez  Oil Spill Symposium. American 
Fisheries Society. 
Picou, J. S., D. A. Gill, and M. J. Cohen, eds. 1997. The 
Exxon Valdez  disaster: readings on a modern so-
cial problem. Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company, 
Dubuque, Iowa. 
Pitcher, T. 1998. Pleistocene pastures: Steller’s sea cow 
and sea otters in the Strait of Georgia in  D. Pauly, 
T. Pitcher, and D. Preikshot (eds.) Back to the Fu-
ture: Reconstructing the Strait of Georgia Ecosys-
tem. Fisheries Centre Re search Reports 6(5): 48-
52. 
Reeves, J. E., and B. J. Turn ock. 1999. Alaska shellfish 
fisheries. in Our Living Oceans. Report on the 
status of U.S. living marine resources, 1999. U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-F/SPO-
41.  
Rosenkrantz, G. 1999. Statis tical modeling of tanner 
crab recruitment. Thesis. University of Alaska 
Fairbanks, Alaska. 
Simenstad, C. A., J. A. Este s, and K. W. Kenyon. 1978. 
Aleuts, sea otters and alternative stable state 
communities. Science 200: 403-411. 
S o u s a ,  W .  P .  1 9 8 4 .  T h e  r o l e  o f  d i s t u r b a n c e  i n  n a t u r a l  
communities. Annual Review of Ecology and Sys-
tematics 15: 353-391. 
Spies, R. B., S. D. Rice, D. A. Wolfe, B. A. Wright. 1996. 
The effects of the Exxon Valdez  oil spill on the 
Alaskan coastal environment. p. 1-16. In: Rice, S. 
D . ,  R .  B .  S p i e s ,  D .  A .  W o l f e ,  a n d  B .  A .  W r i g h t  
(eds.). Proceedings of the  Exxon Valdez Oil Spill 
Symposium. American Fisheries Society Sympo-
sium 18, Bethesda. 
Springer, A. M. and S. G. Speckman. 1997. A forage fish 
is what? Summary of the Symposium. Forage 
Fishes in Marine Ecosystems, Alaska Seagrant Col-
lege Program, AK-SG-97-01. 
Trites, A. W., V. Christensen, and D. Pauly. 1997. Com-
petition between fisher ies and marine mammals 
for prey and primary prod uction in the Pacific 
Ocean. J. Northw. Atl. Fish. Sci. 22: 173-187. 
Tyler, A. V. and G. H. Kruse. 1996. Conceptual model-
ing of brood strength of red king crabs in the Bris-
tol Bay region of the Bering Sea high latitude 
crabs: biology, management, and economics. 
Alaska Sea Grant College Program, AK-SG-96-02. 
512-543. 
W e r t h e i m e r ,  A .  C .  1 9 9 7 .  T h e  s t a t u s  o f  A l a s k a  s a l m o n .  
In D .  J .  S t r oud e r ,  P .  A .  B i s s o n ,  a n d  R .  J .  N a i m a n  
(eds.) Pacific salmon and their ecosystems: status 
and future options. Symposium Proceedings, Seat-
tle, Washington, January 10-12, 1994, P. 179-197. 
Chapman Hall, New York. 
Wheelwright, J. 1994. Degrees of Disaster: Prince Wil-
liam Sound: How Nature Reels and Rebounds. 
Simon and Schuster, New York, 348 pp. 
 
 
 
 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 109 
Exploring Alternative Management 
Policies: A Preliminary Ecological 
Approach for the San Matias Gulf 
Fishery, Argentina 
 
 
Villarino María Fernanda,  
Mario L. Lasta and Marcelo Pájaro 
INIDP, Mar del Plata, Argentina 
 
Abstract 
 
The San Matías Gulf is located along the Argentinean 
coast in the Southwest Atlantic (41° 47´-S-62° 50´W). 
First target species were bivalves ( Aequipecten tehuel-
chus) and hake ( Merluccius hubssi).  Commercial ves-
sels are equipped by: bottom net (T), longliner (LL) 
and the artisanal fleet longline (LL). The values of fixed 
cost are 40 %, effort cost 33 % and sailing cost 3 %. The 
model was built with 19 compartments with a detritus 
group included. Results indicate that in all tested poli-
cies the relationship E/S of catch, value and cost are in-
creased. When ecosystem stab ility is maximized, those 
increases are small and when the net economic value is 
maximized, the increases are the highest. When the so-
cial value aspect is maxi mized the increases fall be-
tween the values from net economic and ecosystem 
m a x i m i z a t i o n .  I t  i s  o b s e r v e d  t h a t  t h e  i n c r e a s e  s u g -
gested by the model for the LL, agree with the actual 
increase of the LL fleet in the fishery and the partial re-
duction of the T fleet. The mean trophic level of the 
catch is on the order of 4.05. The gross efficiency is 
0.000126. The values from the Ecoranger routine sug-
gest that some P/Q and EE are high. 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The San Matías Gulf is located along the Argen-
tinean coast in the Southwest Atlantic Ocean, ap-
proximately between 41° 47’ to 42° 13’ S and 62° 
50’ to 63° 48’ W. The gulf is a big basin, deeper in 
the center (up to 200 m), and connected to the 
shelf on the east through a wide mouth (101 km) 
with a shallow sill (50 m). The total surface is ap-
proximately 13,600 km
2 and 55% of the area is 
deeper than 100 m. Tides are in the order of 6-7 
m and responsible for strong currents. San Matías 
Gulf is a semi-closed area with its own oceano-
graphic characteristics. 
 
In the vicinity of 41° 50’ S, a relatively intense 
thermohaline front is found. Cold-fresh waters 
dominate the south of the front while warm-salty 
waters, typical of the gulf, are found north of the 
front (Piola & Scasso, 1988). The circulation is 
dominated by a cyclonic gyre of approximately 70 
km in diameter located north of the front. Direct 
observations of currents indicates mean velocities 
of 0.14 m/s. Oceanographic studies indicate that a 
cold water mass originating in the southwest 
penetrates into the gulf, flows northward, and fi-
nally drives seaward for the north-east section of 
the mouth. 
 
Water temperature in the winter (average 
11.26°C; sd: 0.08) reveals a well mixed water col-
umn indicative of a deep-reaching convection and 
bottom ventilation. In the summer, temperature 
reaches 18°C and salinity is higher than 34 SPU 
(Scasso & Piola, 1988). 
 
During March, chlorophyl a is of the order of 0.5 
to 0.7 mg/m
3 suggesting low productivity (Car-
reto et al., 1974). In May values of chlorophyll a 
are observed of the order of 0.26 to 1.97 mg/m 3 
being the maximum related to the northwest 
shore (Carreto et al. , 1974). During November, 
high salinity, temperature and nutrients concen-
tration are the conditional factors for low chloro-
phyll a values in shallow waters (northwest). In 
the southeastern area of the gulf, the water is ob-
served to have low salinity and temperature, with 
higher values of chlorophyl a, 0.3 to 0.7 mg/m
3 
(Carreto et al., 1974). 
 
Commercial fishing activities began in the 70’s. 
The initial fleet was composed of small fishing 
vessels approximately 12 m long. First target spe-
cies were bivalves (mussels, Mytilus edulis plat-
ensis and scallops Aequipecten tehuelchus), hake 
(Merluccius hubssi ), mackerel ( Scomber japoni-
cus), sharks ( Callorhynchus callorhynchus), flat-
fish ( Paralichtys sp ., Xystreuris sp .) and other 
demersal fish ( Seriolella porosa , Macruronus 
magellanicus, Acanthistius brasiliensis , Genyp-
terus blacodes) (Lasta, 1988). 
 
At present, the fleet includes 61 ships (Di Gia-
como & Perier, 1992; Gonzalez, 2000), composed 
of three different types of vessels. The bigger ones 
(a) are approximately 30 m long and equipped 
with bottom nets. The medium-sized vessels (b) 
are on average 25 m long and equipped with long-
line and finally, the artisanal fleet (c), is com-
posed of small boats that range between 8 to 15 m 
long and are equipped with long-line. Regarding 
the activity (annual trips, 1999) of each fleet, 
there is an observed inverse relationship between 
the activity and the average length of the vessel: 
542 trips for “a” fleet; 1,149 for “b” and 4,115 trips 
for “c” fleet (Redes, 2000). The jobs/catch for 
each fleet are 0.01, 0.08 and 0.04 for a, b and c 
fleet respectively. The most important market of 
the catch is export, not for domestic consump-
tion. 
 
According to the economic information, the val-
u e s  o f  f i x e d  c o s t  a r e  a b o u t  4 0  % ,  e f f o r t  r e l a t e d  
Page 110, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
cost 33 % and sailing related cost 3 %. The profit 
is different between bottom trawl (T) and 
longliner (LL) fleets approximately 16 and 28 % 
respectively. 
 
During the initial years (70’s) of the fishery the 
total catch did not surpass 4,000 t with the 
Aequipecten tehuelchus  scallop and the mussel 
Mytilus edulis platensis as the target species. To-
tal catch-landing during 1999 was about 12,000 t: 
fleet “a” brought in 9,370 t (48% hake), “b” 1,340 
t (86% hake) and “c” 1,309 t (82% hake). Hake 
was the most important species with a total catch 
of 6,700 t for the whole fishery, considering all 
vessels and the target species of fleet “b” and “c”. 
 
A preliminary Ecopath model was constructed for 
the San Matías Gulf as an ecosystem. Most of the 
species present in the Gulf occur in the adjacent 
waters of the platform, ho wever, stock identifica-
tion studies suggest an independence in the Gulf 
hake population (Christiansen, 1980; Calvo, 1985; 
Bezzi, 1996) and other species (Giussi, 1999), 
from the populations that inhabit the shelf. This 
provides a justification for assuming that the San 
Matías Gulf behaves as a largely enclosed ecosys-
tem, with a minimal ex-
change of biomass with the 
shelf. 
 
T h e  g o a l  o f  t h i s  w o r k  i s  t o  
analyze, by simulating us-
ing Ecosim on a  20 years 
period, the reaction of the 
ecosystem to different 
management regimes (al-
ternative policies). The dif-
ferent results (final/initial 
biomasses for each simula-
tion) are compared with 
the present biomass. 
 
Data 
 
The model was con-
structed starting in 1994, 
when the LL fleet was ex-
perimental. Data on catch, 
biomasses, fleet fishing ef-
fort and jobs/catch for this 
year was used as the start-
ing point of each simula-
tion. 
The model was built with 
19 compartments. Each 
represents organisms with 
a similar role in the food 
web. Those functional 
groups, in increasing order 
of the trophic level were: phytoplankton (1), co-
pepods (2), bivalves (2), shrimps (2), large zoo-
plankton (2.5) small pelagic (3.1), jelly zooplank-
ton (3.2), tail hake (3.6), squids (3.6), pelagic 
fishes (3.7), juvenile hake (3.8), benthic fishes (4), 
demersal fishes (4.2), sea birds (4.2), adult hake 
(4.3), sharks (4.6), rays (4.7), mammals (4.9), kil-
ler whales (5.9). A detritus group was also in-
cluded. 
 
Information on biomass was obtained from re-
search surveys carried out in 1994 (INIDEP, H 
0/07/94). P/B and Q/B were obtained from dif-
ferent sources as surveys, landings, literature 
(Fishbase, 1998) and personal communications. 
 
Results and Discussion 
 
Results of alternative policies 
are presented in Ta-
ble 1. The results are, in terms of quality of the 
ecosystem response in relation with: net eco-
nomic value, social (employment) value and eco-
system stability objectives of maximization. Each 
policy was simulated for the fleet: Trawl (T), 
Small Longliner (SLL) and Big Longliner (BLL). 
Strong criteria were established to maximize the 
Table 1. San Matias Gulf fishery. Alternative policies results maximizing: net eco-
nomic value, social (employment) value and/or ecosystem stability aspects. Fleet: 
Trawl (T), Small Longliner (SLL) and Big Longliner (BLL). 
 
Policy 
 
Name 
Economic 
Social  
Ecosystem 
 
Values (E/S) of: Catch, Value 
and Cost 
Comments 
P 1 Basic 
Economic + 
Ecology 
1 
0 
1 
All values increase (on average) 
5, 4 and 3 times. T and SLL in-
crease all values between 6 and 
4 times. BLL decrease all values 
0.2 to 0.7 times.  
Favours T and 
SLL fleet. 
BLL diminish. 
P 2 Economic 1 
0 
0 
All values increase (on average) 
7, 8 and 5 times. SLL and BLL 
increase values in 13, 15 and 9 
times. T increases values in 5 
and 4 times. 
Favours LL 
fleet. 
P 3 Ecosystem 0 
0 
1 
All values increase (on average) 
15, 17 and 7 %. LL fleet has been 
favoured and SLL present 
higher values (42, 42 and 16 %) 
than BLL (17, 17, 8 %).  
Favours SLL. 
P 4 Social 0 
1 
0 
All values increase (on average) 
4, 6 and 3 times. SLL and BLL 
present similar values: 16, 17 
and 9 times the initial one. T 
fleet was strongly diminished. 
Strongly fa-
vours both SLL 
and BLL fleets. 
P 3ª Social + 
Ecosystem 
 
0 
1 
1 
All values increase (on average) 
4, 6 and 3 times. SLL and BLL 
present similar values: 16, 18 
and 9 times. T shows a strong 
decrease in values. 
Strongly fa-
vours both SLL 
and BLL fleets. 
P 5 Economic + 
Social     + 
Ecosystem 
1 
1 
1 
All values increase (on average) 
4, 6 and 3 times. SLL and BLL 
with values 16, 17 and 9 times. 
T fleet was strongly diminished.  
Strongly fa-
vours both SLL 
and BLLs; T 
fleet low values.
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 111 
alternative policies by using values of 1 or 0.001 
to consider or exclude the three aspect of the poli-
cies. 
 
The results indicate that in all the tested polices 
the relationship between end and start values 
(E/S) of catch, value and cost are increased. 
When ecosystem stability is maximized, those in-
creases are small. In contrast, when the net eco-
nomic value is maximized, the increases are the 
highest. When the social (employment) value as-
pect is maximized the increases fall between the 
values from net economic and ecosystem maximi-
zation. The social value seems to have a strong in-
fluence as suggested by the results observed when 
the social is combined with other objectives as in 
policies P3a (social+ecosystem) and P5 (econ-
omy+social+ecosystem). 
 
As a general pattern it is observed that only in the 
case of the policy P1 (basic) the T fleet was fa-
vored jointly with the SLL. In all the other policies 
the T fleet was highly diminished and SLL and 
BLL showed increases. 
 
The initial scenario (fleet, catch, etc.) and biologi-
cal data was established in 1994. Comparing the 
present (1999) composition of the fleet and re-
lated catch with the predicted ones by the model, 
it is observed that the increase suggested by the 
model for the LL, agree with the actual increase of 
the LL fleet in the fishery and the partial reduc-
tion of the T fleet. 
 
The results indicate that in all policies, with the 
exception of the P3 (ecosystem) there is a strong 
increase in the suggested values, mostly for the 
LL fleet. This would be due to an overestimation 
of the biomass and a higher production due to the 
relative decrease of the T fleet that affects juve-
niles. 
 
No stock was depleted in all the scenarios simu-
lated. The mean trophic level of the catch is on 
the order of 4.05. The gross efficiency is 
0.000126. 
 
Our ecotrophic mass-bala nce model for the San 
M a t i a s  G u l f  i s  b a l a n c e d .  H o w e v e r ,  v a l u e s  f r o m  
the Ecoranger routine suggest that some P/Q and 
EE are high. It is necessary to improve some of 
the input data to run Ecosim again and to check 
the output and to analyze management policies.
 
 
 
References 
 
Bezzi, S. 1996. Sobre la unid ad poblacional de la mer-
luza (Merluccius hubbsi) del Golfo San Matías. Inf. 
Téc. Int. INIDEP N°110/96, 2 pp. 
Calvo, J. 1985. Caracterización de los períodos de cre-
cimiento de la merluza ( Merluccius hubbsi ) en el 
Golfo de San Matías, y variación de parámetros ti-
sulares. Tesis Doctoral, Fa c. Cien. Nat. y Museo, 
Univ. Nac. de La Plata. 
Carreto J. I., Verona, C. A., Casal, A. B. & Laborde, M. 
A. 1974. Fitoplancton, pigmentos y condiciones 
ecológicas del Golfo San Matías. III. CEGSM. 
(Noviembre de 1971). CIC, Informes 10, 49-76. 
Christiansen, H. E. 1980. Aplicación de la histometría 
en el estudio de las variaciones en las microcelulas 
de la musculatura blanca de la merluza (Merlucci-
dae, Merluccius hubbsi ) ,  e n  l a  p l a t a f o r m a  a r g e n -
tina; su importancia. Tesis Doctoral, Fac. Cien. Nat. 
y Museo, Univ. Nac. de La Plata. 
Di Giacomo, E. E. & Perier, M. R. 1992. Retracción de 
las pesquería demersal del Golfo San Matías: ¿Es-
caséz de recursos o disminución de la eficiencia? 
Frente Marítimo, 11(A): 7-13. 
Giussi, A. R.; Hernandez, D. & Abachian, V. E. 1999. 
D i f f e r e n c e s  i n  g r o w t h  o f  l o n g  t a i l e d  h a k e  
(Macruronus magellanicus ) from two areas of 
South Western Atlantic Ocean. Seminario Final 
Proyecto INIDEP – JICA, 135-138. 
Gonzalez, R. 2000. Notas y comentarios sobre el 
proceso de transformación del sector pesquero 
rionegrino en el período 1990-1998. IBMyP Almte. 
Storni, Doc. Téc. 04/00. 
Lasta, M. L., Iribarne, O. O., Pascual, M. S., Zampatti, 
E .  A .  &  V a c a s ,  H .  C .  1 9 8 8 .  L a  p e s q u e r í a  d e l  G o l f o  
San Matías: una aproximación al manejo experi-
mental. Inf. Unesco Cienc. Mar. 47: 168-175. 
Piola A. R. & Scasso L. M. 1988. Circulación en el Golfo 
San Matías. Geoacta 15 (1): 33-51. 
Redes de la Industria Pesq uera Argentina 2000. Año 
13, n° 112. 
Scasso L. M. & Piola, A. R. 1988. Intercambio neto de 
agua entre el mar y la atmósfera en el Golfo San 
Matías. Geoacta 15(1): 13-31.
 
 
 
Page 112, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
Exploring multispecies harvesting 
strategies on the eastern Scotian 
Shelf with Ecosim 
 
 
Alida Bundy
1  
1BIO, DFO Dartmouth, NS  
 
Abstract 
 
Multispecies management strategies for capture fisher-
ies on the eastern Scotian Sh elf were investigated using 
a recently developed formal optimisation routine in the 
tropho-dynamic simulation model, Ecosim. Harvesting 
strategies were optimised using economic, social and 
ecosystem goal functions.  Two contrasting results were 
obtained, depending on model start conditions (i) 
where vulnerabilities were set at 0.4 for all groups, ex-
cept cod/sand lance interact ions which were set at 0.9 
and (ii) where vulnerabilities varied with trophic level. 
In (i) the economic and social goal functions did not 
have much effect on economic or social scores, whereas 
the ecosystem goal function improved the ecosystem 
score. However, all optimisations led to a decrease in 
the overall score. In (ii) the ecosystem goal function 
had little effect on the ecosystem score, while the eco-
nomic and social goal functions lead to improved eco-
nomic and social scores.  The economic and social goal 
functions increased the overall score whereas the eco-
system goal function decreased it. Economic, social and 
ecosystem goal functions have different management 
implications. A trade-off analysis indicated that as the 
ecosystem goal function is given more weight, the eco-
nomic and social scores decrease. The ecosystem score 
did not improve above a weighting of 10, but the social 
score decreased considerably.  These results indicate 
that developing multispecies harvesting strategies is a 
complex task, goal functions may be conflicting and ini-
tial model conditions can affect results. 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Multispecies management strategies for capture 
fisheries were investigated using a recently devel-
oped formal optimisation routine in the tropho-
dynamic simulation model, Ecosim. The “Fishing 
Policy Search” routine allows the user to optimise 
economic, social or ecosystem goal func-
t i o n s .  T h i s  r o u t i n e  w a s  u s e d  w i t h  a n  E c o -
path model of the eastern Scotian Shelf, 
Canada.  
 
Until the 1990s, the ea stern Scotian shelf 
supported a substantial groundfish fishery 
(cod, haddock, American plaice), the bulk 
of which was caught by large groundfish 
trawlers. Other important fisheries in-
cluded silver hake and redfish, as well as a 
spectrum of other species. By 1993, the 
groundfish resource base, and in particular 
cod, had collapsed and a moratorium was placed 
on the fishery. In 2000, the cod have not recov-
ered and the fishery has not re-opened. Fisheries 
for invertebrates such as shrimp, crabs and bi-
valve molluscs have developed as fishers have 
switched targets to other species. The value of the 
total catch has been maintained (Liew 1997). 
 
The Ecopath model describes the eastern Scotian 
shelf system for the time period 1980-1985, prior 
to the collapse of cod when the biomass of many 
species was relatively stable. There are 35 func-
tional groups, including 3 fish groups that are 
split into juvenile and adults, in order to account 
for trophic ontogeny. The structure of the model 
is similar to the Ecopath model of the Newfound-
land-Labrador shelf (see Bundy et al.  2000 and 
Vasconcellos et al. , this report, for a flow dia-
gram). Nine fisheries were identified in the 
model, see Table 1. This model will be fully de-
scribed in a forthcomin g DFO technical report. 
This paper uses preliminary model results. 
 
The model was manually fitted to a time series of 
relative abundance data (cod, haddock, American 
place, flounders, skates, pollock and sand lance) 
in a rough replication of the collapse of the 
groundfish stocks. The fishing mortality rates of 
the large and small mobile fleets were increased 
four fold from 1985 to 1993, when fishing by these 
two fleets ceased as a result of the moratorium. 
All other fleets fished at the constant 1980-1985 
rate until 1993. The optimisation runs below all 
begin in 1993, after the collapse of the cod  and 
groundfish fisheries. 
 
The aim of this work was to explore multispecies 
harvesting strategies using the policy optimisa-
tion routine. The objective functions of the policy 
optimisation routine are defined as follows:  
 
• 
Economic: estimated as total landed value of the 
catch minus total operating costs required to land this 
value 
• Social: employment is used as the social indicator, 
and is assumed proportional to the landed value of the  
catch 
Table 1.  Socio-economic input parameters. 
 
Name of fleet 
 
Fixed 
cost 
(%) 
Effort 
related 
cost 
(%) 
Sailing 
related 
cost 
(%) 
 
Profit  
 
(%) 
 
Total 
value  
(%) 
 
Jobs/ 
Catch 
Large mobile gear 302 0  2 0 30 100 1 
Small mobile gear 30 20 15 35 100 4
Silver hake fishery 30 20 20 30 100 2
Redfish fishery 30 20 15 35 100 2
Large Long line 30 20 15 35 100 1 
Small Long line 30 20 10 40 100 3
Nets 30 20 10 40 100 3
Shrimp fishery 30 20 10 40 100 5 
Crab Fishery 30 20 10 40 100 5 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 113 
• Ecosystem: measured 
by the departure of biomass 
from a specified target bio-
mass (Bideal/Bbase). 
 
Values for the attributes 
of the objective functions 
were varied and sensitiv-
ity to key Ecosim parame-
ters such as vulnerabili-
ties tested. In all runs, the 
economic data, and the 
attributes of the social ob-
jective function were set as outlined in Table 1. 
These are not empirical values derived from fish-
eries data. They are based on typical values sug-
gested by Dr. Rashid U. Sumaila (Fisheries Cen-
tre). 
 
The following analyses were conducted: 
 
1. Baseline runs to optimise for economic, social and 
ecosystem goal functions. In each run, the goal 
function to be optimised was set to 1, and the other 
2 were set to 0.001. The ecosystem was defined as: 
Bideal/Bbase – Cetaceans =10, Grey seals = 1, 
Seabirds = 3, other fish groups = 2; Importance – 
importance of all species =1, except mature and 
immature cod = 2. Vulnerab ilities were set at 0.4 
for all groups, except cod/sand lance interactions 
which were set at 0.9, defining strong top-down in-
teractions. 
2. The importance criterion of the ecosystem goal 
function defined as 1/PB
. The aim was to investi-
gate a possible criterion for defining importance in 
the ecosystem attribute. Other settings are as in 
(1). 
3. Assume that vulnerabilit ies are proportional to 
trophic level. Ecosim simulations can be very sen-
sitive to the value set for the vulnerability parame-
ter in the consumption estimates. A possible ap-
p r o a c h  i s  t o  a s s u m e  t h a t vulnerabilities are pro-
portional to trophic level (ie., the top of the food 
web would be subject to top-down control and the 
bottom of the food web would be subject to bot-
tom-up control). Other settings are as in (1). 
4. Test sensitivity 
to feeding pa-
rameter. The 
feeding time ad-
justment rate 
was set to 0.5 by 
default in the 
above simula-
tions. This as-
sumes that in 
times of scar-
city, al groups 
will increase the  
time spent for-
aging, and thus 
their vulnerabil-
ity to predation. 
This was revised 
t
o
 
0
 
f
o
r
 
a
l
l
 
g
r
oups with the exception of the 3 immature groups 
which were set to 0.5, to reflect that juveniles are
 
more likely, due to high Q/Bs, to increase their 
time feeding when prey is  scarce. Other settings 
are as in (1). 
5. Look at trade-off between economic, social and 
ecosystem goals. The above simulations were run 
for a single goal function. Here, the trade-off be-
tween goal functions was examined. The economic 
and social goal functions were set to 1, whilst the 
ecosystem goal function was varied from 0.1 to 
1000. 
 
 
Each run was started with Ecopath base fishing 
mortality rates, then 1-3 runs using the current 
fishing mortality rates to ensure that the optimi-
sation routine has found the real optima, and not 
a local maxima. Several optimisations with ran-
dom fishing mortality rates were also run to test 
for consistency.
 
 
Results 
 
1. Base optimisations
 
 
The results in Table 2 demonstrate that the opti-
misation routine does optimise for the specified 
goal function. Compared to the results when there 
is no optimisation, the ecosystem goal function 
performs well for the ecosystem score. However, 
the economic and social indicators were not much 
Table 2 - Results of the base optimisations using the economic, social and 
ecosystem goal functions. 
 Goal Function 
No optimisation Economic Social Ecosystem 
Economic 29.35 31.01 28.28 9.55 
Social 125.37 79.34 125.74 26.39 
Ecosystem -8010.53 -8192.08 -8109.01 -6121.08 
Overall  3 1.03 2.04 -2.22 
Fished Bend/Fished B start 1.01 0.80 0.89 1.07 
Total Bend/Total Bstart 1.03 1.06 1.07 1.02 
Groups lost None Silver hake, 
Skates, Dem.pisc. 
Silver hake, 
Skates 
Sand lance 
Table 3.  Comparison of fishing rates per fleet for Analyses 1 to 4. (1) Baseline run; (2) The 
group importance is defined as equal to 1/PB; (3) Assumes vulnerabilities are proportional to 
trophic level; (4) Feeding rate sensitivity. 
 Economic Social Ecosystem 
 (1) (3) (4) (1) (3) (4) (1) (2) (3) (4) 
Analysis 
Fishing Gear 
Base V = 
TL 
Feeding
rate 
Base V = 
TL 
Feeding
rate 
Base Imp. = 
1/PB 
V = 
TL 
Feeding
rate 
Large mobile gear 0.1 1.2 0.1 0 0 0 0 0.1 0.1 0.1 
Small mobile gear 0.2 2 0.2 4.4 20.9 5.1 0.1 0.2 0.9 0.3 
Silver hake fishery 17.7 20.1 16.5 24.1 20.1 20.1 1 3 2.6 0.3 
Redfish fishery 3.5 2.2 4.3 4.7 3 5.1 0.2 0.2 0.3 0.2 
Large Long line 10.1 1.5 7.9 1 0.1 0 0.2 0.3 1.4 0.2 
Small Long line 0.6 1 0.8 20.1 20.7 20 0.8 0.9 0.8 0.6 
Nets 0.2 0.6 0.7 0.7 0.8 1.1 0.5 0.7 0.8 0.9 
Shrimp fishery 0.9 1 1.2 1.4 1.4 1.2 0.9 1 0.9 0.9 
Crab Fishery 2.8 1.1 1.3 2.6 20.2 3 1.1 1.1 1.1 1 
Page 114, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
improved by the economic and social goal func-
tions. The economic and social goal functions per-
form badly with respect to the ecosystem score, 
while the ecosystem goal function performs very 
badly with respect to the economic and social 
scores.  
 
In the economic optimisation, the landed value is 
increased, due to increased catch of crabs, had-
dock, cod, redfish and American plaice. The silver 
hake fishery is increased 18 fold, effectively fish-
ing out the silver hake and presumably releasing 
the above species from predator control (Table 3). 
The fishing rates of the redfish, long line and crab 
fisheries are increased to take advantage of this 
increased bounty. Large and small mobile gears 
are reduced to 10% and 20% of their initial val-
ues, and nets (gillnets and purse seines) are re-
duced to 20 % of their initial value. The total 
fished biomass is 80% of the initial fished bio-
mass and the total biomass of the system is a little 
higher than the initial total biomass. Three 
groups disappear by the end of the simulation.
  
 
The social optimisation also results in a very high 
fishing rate for the silver hake fishery, effectively 
fishing this predator species to zero biomass. The 
landed value is increased, due to increased catch 
of crabs, haddock, cod, and American plaice. The 
fishing rates 
of the fisheries which employ higher 
numbers of fishers for landed value are all in-
creased, that is small mobile gear, small long line 
gear, crab and shrimp fisheries. The total fished 
biomass is 89% of the initial fished biomass and 
the total biomass of the system is a little higher 
than the initial total biomass. Two groups disap-
pear by the end of the simulation. 
 
 
In the ecosystem optimisation, the 
fishing rates of all fleets are reduced, 
except the silver hake fishery, which 
remains the same and the crab fish-
ery, which is increased slightly (Ta-
ble 3). The silver hake fishery is 
maintained to reduce predation 
and/or competition with cod, which 
is given more importance than the 
other groups in the ecosystem at-
tributes. Total landed value and to-
tal catch are reduced. The total fished biomass is 
greater than the initial fished biomass. The total 
biomass of the system is a little higher than the 
initial total biomass, but not as high as the total 
biomass generated by the economic and social op-
timisations. This could be because the economic 
and social  optimisations fish out the predators to 
let lower trophic levels increase to provide abun-
dant resources for the fishery. However, one 
group, sand lance, was lost to the system under 
the ecosystem goal function. 
 
2. The importance criterion of the ecosystem goal 
function defined as 1/PB. 
 
In this optimisation, species with low production 
rates are given more im portance than species 
with high production rates. Thus marine mam-
mals are given more importance than fish and 
fish are given more importance than highly pro-
ductive invertebrate species. The management 
policies implied by the fishing rates resulting 
from the ecosystem optimisation are not qualita-
tively different from the results given above, with 
the exception that the silver hake fishery is in-
creased almost 3 fold (Table 3). However, no 
groups were lost during this optimisation.
  
 
However, the optimisation performs very badly 
for the ecosystem score (Table 4). This perform-
ance is poor since the ecosystem goal function is 
more challenging than the one defined above 
where only cod, which had collapsed, were given 
a n  i m p o r t a n c e  v a l u e  o f  2 .  H e r e ,  c e t a c e a n s ,  g r e y  
seals, seabirds, redfish, dogfish and crabs all have 
importance greater than 6. If the biomass of the 
functional groups in analyses (1) and (2) are com-
pared (Figure 1), most are greater when PBs are 
used to define the importance attributes of the 
ecosystem goal function, whilst the silver hake 
biomass, as a result of increased fishing rate, is 
greatly reduced. This optimisation also performs 
marginally better on the economic and social 
scores, compared to analyses (1).
 
 
3. Assume that vulnerabilities are proportional to 
trophic level.  
 
The system is more resilient under the assump-
Table 4.  Optimisation results when ecosystem impor-
tance attribute is defined as 1/PB. 
 Ecosystem Goal 
Economic 10. 95 
Social 30.19 
Ecosystem -70,334 
Overall  -4.97 
Fished B
end/Fished Bstart 1.07 
Total Bend/Total Bstart 1.04 
Groups lost none 
Table 5. Optimisation results when vulnerab ilities are directly related to 
trophic level. 
No optimisation Economic Social Ecosystem 
Economic 13.39 34.51 30.9 18.7 7
Social 32.53 103.22 141.33 49.04 
Ecosystem -6225.86 -7548.63 -7590.69 -6100.63 
Overall  -1.17 1.15 2.29 -2.18 
Fished Bend/Fished B start 0.97 1.60 1.67 0.99 
Total Bend/Total Bstart 1.01 1.22 1.28 1.02 
Groups lost  Silver hake 
Skates 
Cod,Silv. hake 
Skates 
 
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 115 
tion that vulnerabilities are related to trophic 
level, and supports a higher fishing rate. Under all 
runs, the end total biomass is greater than the 
start total biomass (Table 5), and the scores in 
Table 5 are better than the scores for the base 
simulations (1) in Table 2. 
 
The economic, social and ecosystem scores are all 
improved by the economic, social and ecosystem 
goal functions respectively. Compared to the re-
sults when there is no optimisation, the economic 
and social goal functions perform well for the 
economic and social scores (Table 5). However, 
the ecosystem goal function does not perform 
much better than when there is no optimisation. 
This is in contrast to the results in Table 2.  
 
Both the economic and social optimisations in-
crease the catch, landed value and biomass of 
fished groups. Both also increase the fishing rate 
of the silver hake fishery to the point where silver 
hake is lost from the system, as in Analysis (1). 
Again, the predator is removed and the abun-
dance of its prey and competing groups increases. 
In the economic optimisation, the 
fishing rates of all fleets are 
slightly increased, except for the 
small long line, nets and shrimp, 
which are reduced, while the 
landed value and catch increase.  
In the social optimisation, the 
large mobile gear is reduced to 
zero effort, while the small mobile 
gear, silver hake fishery and small 
long line gear are increased 20 fold, effectively 
removing cod, silver hake and skates from the 
system. The ecosystem optimisation reduces the 
catch and landed value considerably, but succeeds 
in maintaining all functional groups in the sys-
tem, and in particular cod. The fishing rate of sil-
ver hake fishery is increased, again to reduce pre-
dation by silver hake. The fishing rate of other 
gears remains near 1, except large mobile gear 
and redfish gear, which are reduced to 0.1 and 0.3 
respectively. Table 3 compares these fishing rate 
changes with the results from Analysis (1).  
 
4. Test sensitivity to feeding parameter. 
 
The fishing rate scenarios resulting from these 
optimisations are not qualitatively different from 
the results for Analysis (1), with the exception of 
the ecosystem optimisation, which has a much 
lower fishing rate for silv er hake (Table 3). The 
economic and ecosystem go al functions result in 
marginally higher scores than in Analysis (1) and 
the social goal function has a marginally lower 
score (Table 6).  
Table 6.  Optimisation results when feed ing time parameter = 0, and ju ve-
nile groups = 0.5. 
No optimisation Economic Social Ecosystem 
Economic 14.95 32.69 26.8 11.61 
Social 35 83.44 124.73 32.32 
Ecosystem -5794.36 -6594.33 -7049.49 -5755.6 
Overall  -0.92 1.09 2.02 -2.05 
Fished Bend/Fished B start 1.06 0.81 0.8 1.12 
Total Bend/Total Bstart 1.01 1.04 1.05 1.02 
Groups lost none Silver hake 
Halibut 
Silver hake none 
-14.0
-12.0
-10.0
-8.0
-6.0
-4.0
-2.0
0.0
2.0
Ceteaceans
Grey Seals
Seabirds
Cod > 40 cm
Juv Cod
Silver hake
Juv Silver Hake
Haddock
American plaice
Halibut > 65 cm
Juv Halibut
Flounders
Skates
Dogfish
Redfish
Pollock
Trans. Mackerel
Dem. Piscivores
Large Demersals
Small Demersals
Sandlance
Small Pelagics
Small mesopels
Squid
Large Crabs
Small Crabs
Shrimp
[Bratio(2)-Bratio(1)]/Bratio(1)
Figure 1.  Comparison of end biomass/start biomass from results of analyses (1) and (2) above for the ecosys-
tem goal function. 
Page 116, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
 
5. Trade-off between 
economic, social and 
ecosystem goals. 
The trade-off used 
Analysis 3, where 
vulnerabilities were 
assumed to be rela-
tive to trophic level. 
Figure 2 shows the 
optimisation scores 
for a range of weight-
ings, from 0.1 to 100, 
for the ecosystem 
goal function. The 
economic, social and 
ecosystem goal func-
tions have an inflex-
ion point when the 
ecosystem goal function is a given a weighting of 
10. The social goal function has a second inflexion 
point when the ecosystem function has a weight-
ing of 50. The scores continue to improve after 
the inflexion points, but marginally The response 
of the fishing rate predictions to the changing 
weight of the ecosystem function are more com-
plex (Figure 3). The fishing rate of the redfish 
fishery and small mobile gear decrease immedi-
ately, whilst the silver hake fishery, small long 
line and crab fishery have inflexion points at eco-
s y s t e m  w e i g h t i n g s  o f  5 ,  1 0  a n d  5 0  r e s p e c t i v e l y .  
The fishing rates of the shrimp fisheries, large 
long line and nets increase, and have inflexion 
points at ecosystem weightings of 1, 5, 5 respec-
tively. 
 
There is no distinct flip point from one type of 
p o l i c y  t o  a n o t h e r .  A n  ecosystem weighting of 
about 5 to 50 appears to be the transition stage: 
the social and economic goal functions dominate 
the results up to an ecosystem weighting of 5, the 
ecosystem goal function dominates when the eco-
system weighting is greater than 10.
  
 
6. Random fishing rates 
 
All the above optimisations were also run starting 
from random fishing rates. For the economic and 
ecosystem goal functions, it was always possible 
to get qualitatively similar results. The social goal 
function often gave diffe rent results for the red-
-100
-50
0
50
100
150
200
0.1
1
5
10
50
100
Ecosystem weighting
Social and Economic
scores
-8000
-7000
-6000
-5000
-4000
-3000
-2000
-1000
0
Ecosystem score
Economic
Social
E cosystem
Figure 2 Comparison of scores for a range of ecosystem weightings. 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0.1 1 5 10 50 100
Ecosystem weighting
Rel. fishing rate - all other 
gears
0
5
10
15
20
25
Rel. fishing rate, redfish, 
shrimp and nets
Large mobile gear Redfish fishery Nets
Shrimp fishery Small mobile gear Silver hake fishery
Large Longline Small Longline Crab Fishery
Figure 3  Comparison of fishing policies for a range of ecosystem weightings.
Fisheries Centre/FAO Workshop, Page 117 
fish fishery and crab fishery in response to differ-
ent random fishing rates. 
 
Discussion 
 
In the base runs, the economic and social goal 
functions did not greatly improve the economic 
and social scores above th e baseline score, whilst 
the ecosystem score was improved. This may be 
due to the state of the fishery and ecosystem at 
the beginning of the simulation when the cod 
fishery has collapsed and other groundfish stocks 
are low. It is difficult to improve the economic 
and social components of the fishery when the re-
source status is very low. From the ecosystem 
perspective, there is enormous scope for im-
provement. When vulnerabilities were assumed 
to be related to trophic level, there was more 
scope for improving the economic and social 
components of the fisher y and less likelihood of 
improving the ecosystem component. 
 
The model performed better (higher scores were 
obtained from the optimisations, and higher ra-
tios of B
end:Bstart, higher catches) when vulner-
abilities were directly related to the trophic level 
and feeding time of all groups except juveniles 
were set to zero. These options should be further 
investigated in order to determine whether they 
could give a better fit of the model to time series 
data, and whether they could improve other as-
pects of model performance. 
 
The data for the social goal function was based on 
the authors’ judgement. The socio-economic data 
(except price data) were also based on judgement 
(see above). The analyses should be re-run based 
when the base Ecopath model is finalised and this 
data becomes available.
  
 
References 
 
Bundy, A., Lilly, G. and Shelton, P.A. 2000. A mass 
balance model of the Newfoundland-Labrador 
Shelf.  Can. Tech. Rep. Fish. Aquat. Sci.  2310. 
Liew, D. 1997  Trends in the landed value and partici-
pation in the Maritime regions fisheries. DFO 
Fisheries Status Report 97/E. 
 
 
 
Page 118, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
The Use of Ecosystem Models to In-
vestigate Multispecies Management 
Strategies for Capture Fisheries: 
Report on Southern Benguela 
Simulations 
 
 
Lynne Shannon 
Resource Assessment and Modelling Section 
Marine And Caostal Management, South Africa 
 
Abstract 
 
Fishing strategies which best achieved specified objec-
tives were investigated usin g an Ecosim model of the 
southern Benguela ecosyste m for 1990-1997. Value of 
landed catch was maximized when purse seine, demer-
sal trawl and jig fishing effo rt was increased, although 
many stocks collapsed. Numb ers of jobs were maxi-
mized when the demersal, longline and jig fisheries 
were expanded, again causing stock collapses. There is 
little clarity in how to optimize ecosystem importance, 
or what it means in an ecosystem context. A combined, 
compromise objective was ev aluated, which involved 
weighting the primary objectiv es to search for a fishing 
strategy which came closest to simultaneously meeting 
all defined objectives. Mode lling suggests that the op-
timal compromise fishing strategy is that in which 
catches by the squid jig fishery are optimized. However, 
the way in which an ecosystem is presumed to function 
can have major implications for the choice of the opti-
mal fishing strategy under certain objectives. Further, 
differences in the nature of control in the ecosystem 
also affect how error in the management system feeds 
back into the ecosystem; results obtained showed 
greater variability between scenarios under the “closed 
loop” simulations when vuln erabilities are 0.7 than 
when wasp-waist control or vulnerabilities of 0.4 are 
assumed.
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Two mass-balanced ecosystem models have been 
developed for the southern Benguela ecosystem. 
One described the system in the period 1980-
1989, the other 1990-1997 (Jarre-Teichmann 
et al. 1998, Shannon and Jarre 1999). The lat-
ter is the one used for purposes of this work-
shop, and has been updated to include discard 
d a t a  f r o m  S .  H a r t  ( u n p u b l i s h e d  d a t a  f r o m  
SANCOR Observer Programme, Ph.D. in 
prep.).  
 
The area modeled extends from the Orange 
River Mouth (about 29
oS) to East London 
(28oE), offshore to approximately the 500-m 
depth contour, covering an area of 220 000 
km
2. 31 living groups are modeled (Fig. 1) and 
six fisheries are considered separately: i) purse 
seine, ii) midwater trawl, iii) demersal trawl, iv) 
line v) long line and vi) other (includes beach 
seine, gill net, handline, squid jig fishery, recrea-
tional fishery). The most valuable commercial 
species are shallow- and deep-water hake, consti-
tuting 26% of the total catches in the southern 
Benguela during the period 1990-1997. They are 
caught in demersal trawls, the line and the 
l o n g l i n e  f i s h e r i e s .  T h e r e  i s  l i t t l e  r o o m  f o r  e x p a n -
sion of the demersal fishery above present levels. 
Most linefish stocks are currently overexploited 
and cause for concern. Owing to large fluctuations 
in anchovy and sardine stock sizes, the pelagic 
fishery is the most dynamic of all in this region. 
 
During the 1980s, anchovy was the dominant 
small pelagic fish in the southern Benguela up-
welling system. By the 1990 s, the size of the an-
chovy population had decreased and populations 
of sardine, redeye, horse mackerel and both spe-
cies of hake had increased in size. Summed bio-
masses of small pelagic fish  (anchovy  sardine, 
redeye, juvenile horse mackerel and other small 
pelagic fish) increased from 2.62 million tons in 
the 1980s to 2.80 million tons in the 1990s.  
 
In the 1990s, total biomass and many total flows 
through the southern Benguela upwelling system 
were larger than in the 1980s (Table 1), and many 
properties measuring system maturity were also 
larger (Shannon thesis in prep.). 
 
Sensitivity analysis 
 
Simulations in which variability about input pa-
rameters were investigated showed that the mod-
els of the southern Benguela  system during the 
1980s and 1990s were both tightly fitted and that 
there was little room for allocating values to pa-
rameters that were much  different from those 
used in original models (Shannon thesis in prep.). 
Maximization of biomass obtained by varying pa-
rameters within defined limits gave total system 
biomasses only 10% (1 980s) and 15% (1990s) 
above those used in the original models, indicat-
Table 1. Comparison of summary statistics of the Southern 
Benguela upwelling system for the 1980s and 1990s. Flows 
are in t.km -2.y-1, biomass in t.km -2. (After Shannon, thesis in 
prep.). 
 1980s 1990s 
Total biomass (excluding detritus) 221 2 31 
Sum of all consumption 17 230 18 831 
Sum of all exports 2 55 9  1 6 98 
Sum of all flows to detritus 8 771 8 4 96
Total system throughput 37 975 3 9 304 
Sum of all production 16 233 16 638 
Sum of all respiratory flows 9 416 10 27 9 
Total net primary production 11 974 11 977 
Total catches 3.04 2.48
Mean trophic level of the fishery 4.74 4.80 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 119  
ing that the system is fairly well constrained.  
 
Exploring vulnerability settings 
 
Simulations were explored in which “flow con-
trol”, defining the vulnerability of a prey species 
to its predators, was changed to investigate top-
down, bottom-up and wasp-waist flow control be-
tween small pelagic fish and their predators and 
prey in the southern Benguela system (Shannon 
et al.  2000, Cury et al.  2000, Shannon thesis in 
prep.).  
 
Bottom-up control of small pelagic fish by zoo-
plankton prey was found to dampen effects of al-
tered fishing. Under wasp-waist control, assum-
ing small pelagic fish control both their zooplank-
ton prey (top-down) and their predators (bottom-
up), vigorous effects of altered fishing propagated 
through the system. Therefore under bottom-up 
flow-control, heavier fishing on certain groups 
may be sustainable, whereas under another sce-
nario e.g. wasp-waist control, fisheries may crash.  
 
Wasp-waist control is believed to best describe 
the control of flows between groups in the south-
ern Benguela (Cury et al. 2000). 
 
Exploring optimal fishing strategies: Methods 
 
A new routine in Ecosim was used to search for 
theoretical fishing strategies that would optimize 
economic value, number of jobs (social value) or 
ecosystem structural importance, or a balance of 
all three. Values of landed catches (Stuttaford 
1999) and estimates of fishers and land-based 
workers (Cochrane and Payne 1998) were addi-
tional data required for this investigation (Tables 
2 and 3). It should be noted that estimates of 
costs related to the various fisheries in this system 
were not accessible at the time of the workshop, 
so optimization of economic value was simply 
based on the selection of fishing strategies that 
optimized the total value of the landed catches. 
Numbers of jobs per fishery were estimated as the 
sum of fishers and jobs ashore.  
 
Ecosystem structure was modeled in two ways – 
initially, for each ecosystem component, the ratio 
of ideal biomass (B
ideal) to current biomass (B) 
could be selected, and a relative importance value 
allocated. Anchovy, sardine and seabirds were 
considered to be at levels below pristine states, 
Table 2. Estimates of jobs per unit catch in the six 
fisheries of the southern Benguela. 
Fishery Jobs/(catch t.km -2) 
Purse seine 0.015 
Midwater trawl 0.033 
Demersal trawl 0.033 
Line  0.428 
Longline 0.4 
Other (rec’, squid jig, handline) 0.355 
Figure. 1 Diagram of components of the southern Benguela ecosystem model for 1990-1997, arranged according to 
trophic level. 
Page 120, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
and Bideal/B values of 1.5, 2.0 and 1.25 were allo-
cated respectively, equivalent to the larger an-
chovy and seabirds abundances of the 1980s and 
sardine abundance comparable to that of an-
chovy. All groups were given equal relative impor-
tance (unity). This method was in place when 
strategies optimizing economic and social values 
were assessed. In the second, revised method, 
ecosystem structure was modeled by givin relative 
weightings to each group, the default being 
equivalent to B/P ratios, although alternative 
relative weightings were  permitted. The second 
method was used in testing for optimal ecosystem 
structure without optimizing economic or social 
values, and also in simulations to obtain a balance 
between the three objectives. For comparative 
purposes, the first method was also used in the 
trade-off optimization procedure. 
 
Optimal fishing strategies were explored by giving 
a relative weighting of 1 to the objective being 
tested (economic value, social value or ecosystem 
structure) and a value of 0.0001 to the other two. 
Open loop simulations gave biomasses, catches 
and values per group, and once I was satisfied 
that a certain strategy was optimal under the cho-
sen conditions (i.e. that beginning open loop 
simulations from base 
Fs, current Fs to avoid 
plateauing, and from 
random Fs, all pointed 
to common optimal 
fishing strategies), a 
closed loop simulation 
of 100 runs was used to 
produce projected plots 
of biomasses of each 
group over time. De-
fault settings were 
adopted. Wasp-waist 
flow control was as-
sumed for simulations, 
but alternative vulner-
ability settings were 
also tested. A period of 
22 years was modeled. 
In the first two years, Fs 
were assumed to be 
those in the base model 
(1990-1997). The model 
w a s  t h e n  u s e d  t o  f i n d  o p t i m a l  c o n s t a n t  F s  f o r  
each of the six fisheries over the next 20 years, 
given the three objectives or a trade-off between 
them. 
 
Exploring optimal fishing strategies:  
Results and Discussion  
 
Optimizing economic value (landed values): 
 
In a wasp-waist system, optimal economic value 
of the catch was obtained by increasing catches of 
the purse-seine fishery twofold and increasing 
demersal trawl catches almost five-fold (Table 4). 
 
In particular, catches of cephalopods were in-
creased by a factor of 27, largely through expand-
ing the jig fishery (“other” gear category). This 
strategy promoted heavier  fishing on the preda-
tors of cephalopods, such as hakes (demersal 
trawl) and seals, and on species competing with 
cephalopods for food, such as anchovy and sar-
dine (purse seine fishery), resulting in macrozoo-
plankton, anchovy, sardine, chub mackerel, horse 
mackerel, snoek and hakes being eliminated from 
the system, and seals severely reduced (Fig. 2). 
The optimal economic strategy yielded a value 
6.11 times the original 
value of landings in the 
1990-1997 model (Table 
4). Higher net values 
were obtained from open 
loop simulations (with-
out assessment) than 
means achieved over the 
100 closed loop simula-
tion trials  (Table 5). 
Table 3. Landed values (Rands/ton) of fish in the southern Benguela (based on esti-
mates for 1997 in Stuttaford 2000). Derm = Demersal; Mid. = Midwater 
 
Group 
Purse 
seine 
Mid. 
trawl 
Dem. 
trawl 
 
Line 
Long-
line 
 
Other 
Anchovy 408    
S a r d i n e  4 3 0       
R e d e y e  4 0 8       
Other small pelagic fish 408      
Chub mackerel 430  1476    
Juvenile horse mackerel 430      
Adult horse mackerel  1340 1340    
M e s o p e l a g i c  f i s h  4 3 0       
Snoek   2268 4000  4000 
Other large pelagic fish   6464 6464  6464 
Cephalopods   4930   17000 
Small Merluccius capensis   1944    
Large M. capensis   3466  6000 3466 
Small M. paradoxus   1944    
Large M. paradoxus   3466  6000 3466 
Pelagic-feeding demersals   1305    
Benthic-feeding demersals   4411  10000  
Pelagic-feeding chond.    1090   
Benthic-feeding chond.   465  456 456 
Table 4. Optimal fishing strategies over twenty years when economic value was op-
timized. Catch and value are reported as the ratio of those at the start (year 0-2): those 
at the end of the simulation period (year 22). 
 
Wasp-waist Vulnerabilit y=0.4 Vulnerabilit y=0.7 
 Catch Value Catch Value Catch Value 
Purse seine 2.02 2.00 2.1 7 2.1 4 5.50 5.42
Midwater trawl 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00
Demersal trawl 4.61 3.02 5.8 7 2.8 9 5.54 3.80 
Line 0.70 0.52 0.21 0.05 0.1 7 0.04 
Longline 0.56 0.76 0.1 9 0.23 0.28 0.43
Other 27.05 34.80 2 9.48 38.15 26.2 34.18 
Total 3.41 6.11 4.05 6.3 7 5.61 7.01 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 121  
 
A uniform vulnerability setting of 0.7 gave simi-
lar results to those assuming wasp-waist flow 
control. By comparison, when vulnerabilities 
were uniformly set to 0.4 for all groups, macro-
zooplankton did not crash, pelagic demersal fish 
became more abundant, and the increase in ce-
tacean biomass was dampened. There was 
greater variability between the 100 runs when 
vulnerabilities were 0.7 than in the wasp-waist 
or 0.4 vulnerability simulations. This was also 
true when social, ecosystem and trade-off objec-
tives were optimized 
 
Optimizing employment in the fisheries  
(no. of jobs): 
 
For all three vulnerability settings, fishing strate-
gies optimizing employment caused stocks of 
chub mackerel, snoek, other large pelagic fish and 
hakes to crash because fishing using demersal 
trawls was 4-5 times heavier, fishing using 
“other” gear was increased and in most cases, the 
longline fishery was expanded. Snoek and other 
large pelagic fish were depleted (Fig. 3) because 
they are targeted by the line fishery, having a high 
employment value. Similarly, hakes are caught in 
both the demersal and longline fisheries, the lat-
ter employing many people relative to the catch 
size (Table 2). 
 
For vulnerabilities of 0.4, in half the cases simu-
lating optimal fishing strategies in the open loop 
from random Fs, a fishing strategy similar to that 
obtained for vulnerabilities of 0.7 was obtained, 
in the other half, these differed (Table 6). Wasp-
waist control and vulnerabilities of 0.4 produced 
similar closed loop versus open loop results; all 
values were larger in the open loop simulations. 
By comparison, closed loop simulations gave lar-
ger ecosystem structure values than open loop 
simulations when vulnerabilities 
were 0.7, suggesting that this 
vulnerability setting may  cause 
instabilities in the system (Table 
7). 
 
Optimizing ecosystem structure: 
 
When relative weightings were 
assumed equivalent to the B/P 
ratios for each group, and wasp-
waist control was assumed, the 
“optimal” fishing strategy in 
terms of ecosystem objectives 
had detrimental effects on the 
ecosystem; macrozooplankton, 
chub mackerel, snoek and hakes 
all collapsed (Fig. 4). Therefore, 
numerous different selections of 
relative ecosystem weightings 
were tested in attempts to reach 
a more balanced system in which 
these stocks were not depleted. It 
was found that either horse 
mackerel or other large pelagic 
fish (including snoek) were fa-
voured, never both simultane-
ously. 
 
Table 5. Open versus closed loop values when optimizing 
landed economic values – differences indicating the “cost” 
of improving assessment estimates. Wasp-waist control was 
assumed. * =(approach used at workshop) 
Criteria Open loop Closed loop 
Net economic value 1.5x10 6 8.2x10 5 
Social/employment value 2.8x10 5 1.4x10 5 
Ecosystem stability value * -7.6x10 3 -6.0x103 
Overall value 8.76 4.66 
Figure. 2 Biomass plots (over the 22 year simulation period) of 100 closed 
loop simulations optimizing landed catch values (Rands/ton) in the south-
ern Benguela system. Wasp-waist control was assumed. 

Page 122, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
It was felt that the scenario in 
which snoek and other large 
pelagic fish were not reduced 
was the better option for inves-
tigating the trade-off strategy 
because these fish are highly 
valuable and form an impor-
tant part of fisheries with high 
employment values. Therefore, 
the B/P defaults were accepted 
for most groups except for 
macrozooplankton and small 
hakes (increased to 1.0) and 
large hakes (increased to 1.5). 
Simulations assuming wasp-
waist control and vulnerabili-
ties of 0.4 were similar (Table 
8), favouring snoek and other 
large pelagic fish, but greatly 
reducing horse mackerel abun-
dance (Fig. 5). By comparison, 
vulnerabilities of 0.7 caused the 
system to revert to a state simi-
lar to that when weightings 
were set according to B/P ratios.  
 
Closed loop simulations showed 
that vulnerabilities of 0.7 pro-
duced larger economic, social 
and ecosystem structural values 
than the other two flow control 
types. In all cases, identical eco-
system and overall values in 
open and closed loop simula-
tions indicated that there were 
no additional costs or benefits to 
optimizing net ecosystem values 
by improving stock assessments. 
This is in contrast to strategies 
in which either economic or so-
cial objectives are optimized 
(Tables 5 and 7). 
 
Towards a trade-off between 
optimizing economic value, so-
cial value and importance of 
ecosystem structure: 
 
Extensive testing of various dif-
ferent weightings of eco-
nomic:social:ecosystem values 
was undertaken in an attempt to 
find a trade-off fishing strategy 
that optimized all three objec-
tives.  
 
To minimize stock collapses in 
the southern Benguela, ecosys-
tem structure required a much 
larger weighting than economic 
or social values. 
Table 6. Optimal fishing strategies over twenty years when employment was 
optimized. Catch and value are reported as the ratio of those at the start (year 
0-2): those at the end of the simulation period (year 22). * assuming vulner-
abilities of 0.4, typifying half the simulations and differing from those when 
vulnerabilities=0.7. 
 Wasp-waist Vulnerabilit y=0.4* Vulnerabil-
 Catch Value Catch Value Catch Value 
Purse seine 0.0 5 0.0 5 0.49 0. 49 2. 96 2. 97
Midwater trawl 0. 96 0. 96 0.7 9 0.7 9 0.38 0.38 
Demersal trawl 3.73 2.84 5.66 3.28 5.45 4.25
Line 3.84 3.4 7 0.86 0.1 9 1.07 0.24
Longline 2.8 7 4.35 0.8 7 1.16 4.13 6.86 
Other 25.05 2 9.41 26.5 9 33.34 28.38 36.4 
Total 2.05 5.39 3.06 5.90 4.3 7.31 
Table 7. Open versus closed loop values when optimizing employment. 
 Wasp-waist control  Vulnerabilities of 
0.4 
 
Criteria 
Open loop Closed 
loop 
Open 
loopx105 
Closed 
loopx103 
Net economic value 1.3 x10 6 7.8 x10 5 1.8 x10 5 7.6 x10 5 
Social/employment value 2.6 x10 5 1.5 x10 5 3.1 x10 5 1.2 x10 5 
Ecosystem stability value  
(approach used at workshop) 
-1.6x103 -1.5x103 -853.61 -893.05 
Overall value 12.84 7.71 15.37 5.95 
Figure. 3 Biomass plots (over the 22 year simulation period) of 100 closed 
loop simulations optimizing employment (jobs/ton caught) in the southern 
Benguela system. Wasp-waist control was assumed. 

FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 123  
 
Even under a weighting of 
1:1:10, and assuming the con-
servative vulnerability setting 
of 0.4, chub mackerel, snoek, 
other large pelagic fish and 
hakes were eliminated from 
the system. Therefore a 
weighting of 1:1:25 for eco-
nomic: social :ecosystem was 
adopted. 
 
Using the first method of 
evaluating ecosystem impor-
tance, catch was increased by 
up to 50% and economic value 
between two and three-fold 
when ecosystem structure was 
optimized (Table 10). Catches, 
especially of cephalopods, 
were increased in the “other” 
gear fisheries and abundances 
of most groups increased or at 
least remained constant (Fig. 
6).  
 
Two sets of optima were ob-
tained using the second 
method to assess ecosystem 
structure (weighting accord-
ing to B/Ps with increased 
values for macrozooplankton 
and hakes) and to find a 
trade-off between the three 
objectives. In the first, 
catches were doubled and 
economic values increased 
between five- and six-fold 
when wasp-waist control and 
vulnerabilities of 0.7 were as-
sumed (Table 11).  Similarly, 
in some simulations where 
vulnerabilities were propor-
tional to trophic levels, and  
which began using random 
Fs, the same optimal strategy 
was found (Fig. 7). 
 
Such strategies caused col-
lapses of chub mackerel, 
snoek and hakes by expan-
sion of the demersal trawl 
fishery to four or five times its 
original size. These conse-
quences differed from those 
under optimal trade-off fish-
ing strategies obtained when 
vulnerabilities of 0.4 were as-
sumed, and in some cases 
when vulnerabilities were 
proportional to trophic levels 
(Table 11). 
Table 9 .Open versus closed loop values when optimizing ecosystem structure. 
 
 Wasp-waist con-
trol 
Vulnerabilities of 
0.4 
Vulnerabilities of 
0.7 
 
Criteria 
Open 
loop 
Closed 
loop 
Open 
loop 
Closed 
loop 
Open 
loop 
Closed 
loop 
Net econ. value 4.1 x10 4 3.0x10 4 3.7x10 4 2.8x10 4 4.8x10 5 2.9x10 5 
Social/employ.  8.3 x10 3 5.8x10 3 6.5x10 3 4.7x10 3 2.2x10 4 1.4x10 4 
Ecosystem stabil-
ity (as at work-
shop) 
1.0x103 1.0x103 9.8x102 9.8x10 2 1.2x10 3 1.2x10 3 
Overall value 1.21 1.21 1.17 1.17 1.45 1.45 
Table 8. Optimal fishing strategies over twenty years when optimal ecosystem 
structures were attempted using the revised (second) method. Catch and value 
are reported as the ratio of those at the start (year 0-2): those at the end of the 
simulation period (year 22). 
 
 Wasp-waist Vulnerabilit y=0.4 Vulnerabilit y=0.7 
 Catch Value Catch Value Catch Value 
Purse seine 0.10 0.10 0.08 0.08 0.12 0.12 
Midwater trawl 0.1 7 0.1 7 0.32 0.32 2.03 2.03
Demersal trawl 0.06 0.0 7 0.0 7 0.08 3.31 2.24
Line 0.21 0.21 0.13 0.13 0.18 0.24 
Longline 1.54 1.55 1.60 1.61 0.30 0.40 
Other 0.72 0.63 0.4 7 0.41 0.76 0.73 
Total 0.10 0.16 0.0 9 0.14 1.52 1.61
Figure 4 Biomass plots (over the 22 year simulation period) of 100 closed loop 
simulations optimizing ecosystem struct ure in the southern Benguela system 
when groups were weighted according to their B/P ratios. Wasp-waist control 
was assumed 
Page 124, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
 
Under these conditions, 
catches were reduced to a 
third of original levels and 
economic values increased be-
tween two- and threefold by 
large increases in the valuable 
longline and “other” fisheries 
and a reduction in the demer-
sal fishery. The trade-off in the 
second set of strategies was a 
severe reduction in horse 
mackerel stock size (Fig 7). 
 
In all cases using the second 
ecosystem approach, the 
purse seine fishery was closed, 
allowing anchovy and sardine 
stocks to grow, whereas under 
the first ecosystem method, a 
healthy purse seine fishery 
was maintained. However, 
both methods revealed a 
common goal of expanding 
the economic and socially 
valuable “other” gear fisheries, 
in particular to enhance 
catches of cephalopods. This 
was achieved by increasing cephalopod 
biomass by a factor of between 15 and 
36, in particular through a reduction in 
its predators (hakes and seals). 
 
There were no differences between 
open and closed loop simulation values 
when wasp-waist control was assumed 
(Table 12), suggesting little benefits in 
improving estimates of stocks and ef-
fort regulation. Overall values for 
closed loop simulations were larger in 
the trade-off simulations than in those 
in which only one objective was opti-
mized at a time (Table 12 cf. Tables 5,7 
and 9).  
 
Vulnerability settings of 0.7 gave a net 
ecosystem stability value that was 
lower in open loop simulations than in 
closed loop simulations incorporating 
variability about stock assessments and 
methods of effort control.  
 
Assuming vulnerabilities of 0.7 may 
give rise to instabilities in the system 
and unrealistic optimal fishing strate-
gies. 
Table 10. Optimal fishing strategies over twenty years when optimal ecosystem 
structures were attempted using the first method (ecosystem importance) and 
weighting economic:social:ecosystem importance as 1:1:25. Catch and value are 
reported as the ratio of those at the start (year 0-2): those at the end of the 
simulation period (year 22). 
 Wasp-waist Vulnerabilit y=0.4 Vulnerabilit y=0.7 
 Catch Value Catch Value Catch Value
Purse seine 0. 99 0. 99 0.2 3 0.2 3 1.47 1. 47 
Midwater trawl 3.0 7 3.0 7 1.53 1.53 0.33 0.33 
Demersal trawl 1.13 1.16 1.63 1.5 1.12 1.1 7
Line 0. 97 0. 91 0.62 0.5 7 0.44 0.3 7
Longline 1.3 7 1.38 1.8 9 1. 91 1.58 1.5 9
Other 16.7 9 17.23 16.7 7 18.61 16.53 18.18 
Total 1.27 2.88 1.07 3.12 1.49 3.01 
Table 11. Optimal fishing strategies over twenty years when a trade-off between 
economic value, employment value and ecosystem structure was achieved by 
relative weighting of these three objectives: 1:1:25 using the revised method of 
ecosystem weighting. Catch and value are reported as the ratio of those at the 
start (year 0-2): those at the end of the simulation period (year 22). 
 Wasp-waist Vuln.=0.4 Vuln.=0.7 Vuln. α TL 
 Catch Value Catch Value Catch Value Catch Value 
Purse seine 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.01 
Midwater 
trawl 
0.21 0.21 0.28 0.28 0.23 0.23 0.02 0.02 
Demersal 
trawl 
3.75 2.93 0.01 0.01 4.65 3.95 0.01 0.01 
Line 0.23 0.28 0.03 0.03 0.10 0.12 0.03 0.03 
Longline 0.75 1.11 30.43 30 .78 0.34 0.57 27.78 28.15 
Other 25.31 28.12 19.16 18.16 28.59 33.59 21.05 20.66 
Total 1.95 5.03 0.36 2. 42 2.37 6.28 0.38 2.65 
Figure. 5 Biomass plots (over the 22 year simulation period) of 100 
closed loop simulations optimizing ecosystem structure in the southern 
B e n g u e l a  s y s t e m  w h e n  g r o u p s  w e r e  w e i g h t e d  a c c o r d i n g  t o  t h e i r  B / P  
ratios, with the exceptions of macrozooplankton and small hakes (set 
to 1) and large hakes (set to 1.5). Wasp-waist control was assumed.
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 125  
 
Conclusions 
 
(i) Fishing strategies that optimize economic 
value or employment are understandable and can 
be explained.  
 
(ii) These simulations often give rise to extreme 
alternative fishing polici es and highlight the im-
portance of carefully defining the objectives for 
setting a new fishing strategy in a particular sys-
tem.  
 
(iii) The way in which a system is pre-
sumed to function (vulnerability set-
tings) can have major implications for 
the choice of optimal fishing strategy 
under certain objectives. 
 
(iv) In contrast to optimizing economic 
or social values, there is not as much 
clarity in how to optimize ecosystem 
stability or structure. This is partly be-
cause the latter includes some subjec-
tivity in the selection of groups to be 
given higher weightings, or even to be 
“monitored” when testing for reason-
able optimal strategies.  
 
(v) The trade-off fishing strategy se-
lected depends on how much relative 
weighting is given to each objective i.e. 
it is somewhat subjective and depends 
on the importance given to a stable 
ecosystem structure. 
 
(vi) The 1:1:25 economic: social: eco-
system weighting using the first 
method to find a trade-off strategy was 
similar to that using the second ecosys-
tem optimization method in that both 
optimized cephalopod catches. This provides con-
fidence in the overall conclusions drawn about 
theoretical optimization of fishing strategies in 
the southern Benguela system given specific theo-
retical objectives. 
 
(vii) When ecosystem structural weightings were 
considered to be proportional to trophic levels, 
the optimal trade-off fishing strategy was consis-
tent with those obtained when wasp-waist control 
and vulnerabilities of 0.4 were assumed. There-
fore this general guideline to setting of vulner-
abilities is promising. 
 
(viii) The larger variability between the 100 
means of closed loop simulations when vulner-
abilities were 0.7 than when wasp-waist control 
or 0.4 vulnerabilities were assumed, suggests that 
smaller vulnerabilities ar e probably preferred for 
the southern Benguela upwelling system. Wasp-
waist flow (bottom-up control of predators by 
small pelagic fish and top-down control of zoo-
plankton by small pelagic fish) gave reasonable 
results. 
 
 
Optimizing the ecosystem objective: 
method one
0
5
10
15
20
macrozooplank
ton
sardine
horse
mackerel
cephalopods
other demersal
fish
seabirds
End/start
wasp-waist
v= 0. 4
v= 0. 7
Figure. 6  Comparing end/start biomasses of major 
groups in the southern Benguela system under three 
vulnerability settings, when the first method of opti-
mizing ecosystem importance was used to find a trade-
off between economic, social and ecosystem objectives 
by relative weightings 1:1:25.
 
Fig. 7 Biomass plots (over the 22 year simulation period) of 100 closed 
loop simulations finding an optimal trade-off between economic, social 
and ecosystem objectives (weighted 1:1:25) in the southern Benguela 
system when the revised ecosystem weighting method was used and 
vulnerabilities were proportional to trophic levels. 
Page 126, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
References 
 
Cochrane, K.L.  and A.I.L.Payne 1998. People, Purses 
and Power: Developing fisheries policy for the new 
South Africa. Pages 57-71 in T.J.Pitcher, P.J.B.Hart 
and D.Pauly (eds) Reinve nting Fisheries Manage-
ment. Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht, Netherlands.  
435 pp. 
Cury, P., Bakun, A., Crawford, R.J.M., Jarre-
Teichmann, A., Quinones, R.A., Shannon, L.J. and 
Verheye, H.M. 2000. Sma ll pelagics in upwelling 
systems: patterns of interaction and structural 
changes in “wasp-waist” ecosystems. Academic 
Press, ICES Journal of Marine Science, Sympo-
sium Edition 57(3): 603-618. 
Jarre-Teichmann, A., Shannon, L.J., Moloney, C.L. and 
Wickens, P.A. 1998. Comp aring trophic flows in 
the southern Benguela to those in other upwelling 
ecosystems. In Pillar, S.C., Moloney, C.L., Payne, 
A.I.L. and Shillington, F.A. Benguela dynamics: 
impacts of variability on shelf-sea environments 
and their living resources. S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 19: 
391-414. 
Shannon, L.J., Cury, P and Jarre, A. 1999. Modelling 
effects of fishing in the southern Benguela ecosys-
tem. Academic Press. ICES Journal of Marine Sci-
ence, Symposium Edition 57(3):720-722. 
Shannon, L.J. in prep. Modelling trophic flows through 
the southern Benguela upwelling system, towards 
provision of ecosystem management advice. Ph.D. 
thesis to be submitted - end 2000. 
Stuttaford, M. (ed.) 2000. Fishing Industry Handbook: 
South Africa, Namibia and Moçambique. Exbury 
Publications, Cape Town, South Africa. 404 pp
. 
 
 
Table 12. Open versus closed loop values for a trade-off between economic value, social value and ecosystem structure 
using the revised method of ecosystem weighting. * = approach used at workshop. 
 
 Wasp-waist control  Vuln.= 0.4 Vuln.= 0.7 Vuln. α TL 
Criteria Open 
loop 
Closed 
loop 
Open 
loop 
Closed 
loop 
Open 
loop 
Closed 
loop 
Open 
loop 
Closed 
loop 
Net economic value 1.3 x10 6 1.3x10 6 4.6x10 5 3.1X10 5 1.6x10 6 7.3x10 5 4.9x10 5 3.3x10 5 
Social value 2.3x10 5 2.3x10 5 1.6x10 5 1.1X10 5 2.8x10 5 1.4x10 5 1.8x10 5 1.1x10 5 
Ecosyst. stability* 1.1x10 3 1.1x103 9.2x102 9.2X10 2 1.1x10 3 1.2x10 3 9.3x10 2 9.3x10 2 
Overall value 50.79 50.79 38.38 34.76 56.08 45.66 39.37 35.37 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 127  
Impact of harvesting strategies on 
fisheries and community structure 
on the Continental Shelf of the 
Campeche Sound, Southern Gulf of 
Mexico
 
 
 
Francisco Arreguin-Sanchez 
CICIMAR, La Paz, Baja California Sur, Mexico 
 
Abstract 
 
An analysis of harvest strategies for the ecosystem of 
t h e  C a m p e c h e  S o u n d ,  S o u t h e r n  G u l f  o f  M e x i c o ,  w a s  
conducted based on a mass- balance model previously 
published, and making some emphasis on the shrimp 
fishery, which is strongly depleted. In the ecosystem 
model four fleets were identified, the shrimp and three 
artisanal fleets associated with the fishing gear and tar-
get species. A time series of estimated biomass (and 
corrected because of a depe nsatory effect) and fishing 
pattern for the shrimp fishery,  for the period of 1974 to 
1993 was contrasted with Ecosim shrimp-biomass 
simulation, also involving forcing factors representing 
one of the main causes for shrimp-biomass depletion. 
Besides this simulation, seven harvesting strategies 
were simulated by optimizing different criteria such as 
economic rent, social (employment) and ecosystem 
stability, as well as a combination between them. The 
impact of different strategies on biomass groups, on the 
uncertainty, and how biomass changes with trophic 
level was measured. Changes in vulnerability to preda-
tion and in the mean trophi c level were also explored. 
Simulations were conducted under different harvesting 
strategies considering optimization of economic rent, 
jobs and ecosystem stability criteria combined, as well 
as the ecosystem stability cr iterion alone. During such 
simulations some conditions were modified such as the 
weighting factors on ecosystem criteria and uncertainty 
per group; weighting factors for the impact of fleets, 
and annual changes in catchability per fleet. Simulated 
biomasses were compared with some fixed levels of 
biomass as reference points. In general terms most 
scenarios caused a depletion of some groups below the 
critical level of 50% of the starting biomass, which was 
here considered as an undesirable level. Even more 
sharks tend to disappear during the first years of simu-
lation. A scenario where the ecosystem structure crite-
rion was optimized, shows no depletion of any group. 
For all the cases, shrimp showed an uncertain behavior 
during the terminal years of  the simulation, always as-
sociated with the effect of forcing factors. However, for 
the scenario optimizing an ecosystem structure crite-
rion, shrimp uncertainty was lower. 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The continental shelf of the Campeche Sound on 
the Southern Gulf of Mexico is a complex ecosys-
tem accounting for the use and exploitation of the 
natural resources. In this area the oil industry ex-
tracts around 70% of the oil and natural gas pro-
duced in the country, and converges with other 
activities, mainly fisheries and services (mainly 
transport). 
 
The Campeche Sound has historically been im-
portant because of the exploitation of shrimp re-
sources. Before the oil industry was established 
(early 80's), fishing, and particularly the shrimp 
fishery, was the center of the regional economy. 
Landing records show that for many years shrimp 
was practically the only species exploited; other 
species did not appear in the statistics. Higher 
yields were obtained during early 1970’s with 
around 27,000t per year, of which 90% was the 
pink shrimp ( Farfantepenaeus duorarum ). Cur-
rently this fishery is collapsed, with yields close to 
3,000t per year. The main problem with this fish-
ery is that recruitment rate has continuously de-
clined since the 1970’s, and is highly influenced 
by environmental factors such as salinity, which 
has decreased markedly since the mid-80’s. In-
creasing sea surface temperature has reduced 
stock abundance. In both cases, correlation 
analysis indicates values above r
2=0.7 (Ramírez-
Rodríguez et al.  2000). With decrease in the 
shrimp stock, there has been more targeting of 
other fish.  
 
The ecosystem approach to explore the impact of 
harvest strategies is based on a model constructed 
with Ecopath with Ecosim software (Christensen 
and Pauly 1992, Walters et al.  1997) by Manik-
chand-Haileman et al. (1998), and it is based on 
information on biomass taken from surveys dur-
ing the period August 1988 to July 1994. The eco-
system comprises an area of 65,000km
2, where 
the shrimp fishery commonly operates with a cur-
rent fleet size of around 320 boats. In this area, 
close to the coast, some artisanal fisheries also 
operate. Recent statistics indicate the existence of 
more than 4400 boats in the artisanal fleet. De-
tails of the basic data, related to the construction 
of the model and ecosystem statistics, can be con-
sulted in Manikchand-Haileman et al.  (1998), 
while main biomass flows are shown in Figure 1. 
Table 1. List of strategies. 
 
Strategy Description 
Strategy 1 Leave things under the  current tendency.
This is taken as the base scenario 
Strategy 2 Optimize economic benefits over social an d
ecological benefits 
Strategy 3 Optimize social benefits in terms of jobs 
Strategy 4 Optimize ecosystem benefits in terms o f
ecological quality/conservation 
Strategy 5 Optimize economic, social and ecological
benefits as an ideal scenario 
Strategy 6 Optimize econom ic and social benefits 
Strategy 7 Optimize social and ecological benefits 
Strategy 8 Optimize economic  and ecological benefits 
Page 128, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
In 2000, the National Institute of Fisheries in 
Mexico met a panel of experts to analyze the 
situation of the shrimp fishery in the Campeche 
Sound. The main conclusions were classified un-
der three major issues: the impact of the fishery 
(overcapitalization, overfishing), the quality of the 
environment (which in some areas has been al-
tered by natural and human-induced causes), and 
social aspects (loss of employment and inability 
to control illegal fishing). The aim of this contri-
bution is to test harvesting strategies of the fish-
eries of Campeche Sound in the context of the 
ecosystem, and to evaluate the impact of potential 
management policies. 
 
Material and Methods 
 
The previously published model contains 11 
groups: fishes, sharks, shrimp, squids, epifauna, 
infauna, zooplankton, phytoplankton and detri-
tus. There are two types of fisheries, shrimp 
trawling and artisanal fisheries. The latter was di-
vided in three groups by target species and fishing 
gear. The artisanal-demersal fleet  mostly uses 
short longlines and hand-based hooks; this fleet 
target on groupers, sna ppers among others. The 
artisanal-pelagic fleet  mostly uses gillnets to 
catch mackerels, jacks, and hook-lines for sharks; 
and the beach seine fishery,  which operates in 
some localities exploiting a number of species. 
 
Harvesting strategies were tested for the optimi-
zation of three major criteria, economic benefits  
in terms of net profits, social benefits in terms of 
employment ( social benefits ) generated by the 
fisheries, and ecosystem benefits  in terms of 
maintenance of the stocks (ecosystem stability). 
Under this context eight strategies were tested as 
in Table 1. 
 
Preparing the base scenario (Strategy 1) 
 
Catch values were obtained from statistical re-
cords reported by the ministry of fisheries 
(SEMARNAP, 1998) as landed prices. Costs were 
represented as proportions as in Table 2.  
 
Time series were used to  calibrate simulated bio-
masses. In this case, the available data corre-
sponded to harvest rates and estimated biomasses 
for the shrimp fishery which were previously es-
timated through a non-equilibrium biomass dy-
namic model (Schaefer 1957, Hilborn and Walters 
1992) and corrected by non-compensatory effects 
Table 2. Costs per fleet. 
 
 
 
Fleet 
Fixed 
cost  
 
(%) 
Effort 
related 
cost 
(%) 
Sailing 
related 
cost 
(%) 
 
Profit  
 
(%) 
Shrimp 5 40 10 55
Art DEM HL 2 20 1 77 
Art PEL  2 30 3 65 
Art Beach Seine 2 10 0 88 
Figure. 1  Biomass-flow diagram for the ecosystem of the continental shelf of the Campeche Sound, Mexico. 
Biomass (B), Consumption (Q) and fishery harvest are in g m-2 wet weight; all flows are in g m-2 year-1 (taken 
from Manikchand-Haileman et al. 1998). 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 129  
(unpublished data 1). Time se-
ries cover the period of 1974 to 
1994. 
 
A significant correlation with 
forcing factors and shrimp 
abundance were found, particu-
larly sea surface temperature 
and salinity, being the last an 
inverse relationship. Here salin-
ity was incorporated as forcing 
factor affecting shrimp group. 
 
Vulnerabilities to predation 
were assumed to be v = 0.3, 
representing mixed control of 
flows of biomass by predators 
and preys.  
 
For all strategies the mean tro-
phic level of the ecosystem, 
MTLE, was computed based on 
simulated biomasses:  
 
∑∑
==





=
n
1i
i
n
1i
ii BTLBMTLE  
 
where B i = biomass of the stock i, and TL i = the 
mean trophic level of the stock i. 
 
Testing Strategies 
 
Applying specific objective functions, all the 
strategies were tested; fo r this, a very low weight 
was assigned to the undesirable criteria, and unit 
weight to the objective criteria. A null ecological 
w e i g h t  ( z e r o )  w a s  a s s i g n e d  t o  e a c h  g r o u p ,  w i t h  
exception of shrimp, where the weight was unity. 
For the social criteria, defined as the Job/Catch 
ratio, the assigned values for each fishery were as 
follows: shrimp=0.5, art-DEM HL=1.7, art-
PEL=1.7 and art-beach seine=2.0. 
 
In a trophic model, vulnerability to predation can 
be an important factor defining simulated bio-
mass trajectories. Arreguín-Sánchez (2000) 
showd that modelled octopus biomass is unstable 
with low values of vulnerability to red grouper on 
the continental shelf of Yucatan. The same occurs 
under high vulnerabilities combined with high 
fishing pressure. In the present case, the explora-
tion of the vulnerability parameter is useful be-
cause of the stress to which shrimp stock is cur-
rently subjected. In addiotion to the EwE default 
value (v = 0.3), three scen arios were tested with 
values v = 0.2, v = 0.4 and v = 0.7, where lower 
                                                        
1 A. Navarrete del Proó and F. Arreguín-Sánchez. 2000. Deple-
tion of the pink shrimp fishery on the Campeche Bank. INP-
Campeche, CICIMAR-IPN. Mexico. 17p. 
and higher values represent bottom-up and top-
down control, respectively. 
 
Another aspect to be considered is the starting 
fishing rate, F, to be used for simulations. In this 
case two scenarios were tested, selecting current 
F’s as starting state, or selecting random F’s  val-
ues. The difference is that during simulations 
fishing rate can follow a different routes to arrive 
at the optimization for a particular objective func-
tion.  
 
Closed loop simulation 
 
The performance of the simulations above can be 
improved by specifying some factors affecting the 
fishery. Here the incorporation of uncertainty for 
risk analysis, changes in catchability with time, 
the relative impact of the fishery and the com-
parison with some biological reference points  
were considered. All strategies were tested under 
this scope, and for particular situations, with em-
phasis on the shrimp stock. 
 
Results 
 
Strategy 1, as the base scenario, leaves things 
running under the current pattern, also  repre-
senting the state of the ecosystem against which 
others strategies can be  compared. Time series 
and a forcing factor (sal inity anomaly) were in-
corporated as mentioned above. 
Figure 2.  Ecosim simulated biomass (line) contrasted with independ-
ent estimates of biomass (dots) and re a l  f i s h i n g  p a t t e r n  ( b l a c k  b a r s  o n  
the bottom) for the pink shrimp ( F. duorarum) on the Campeche Sound, 
Mexico, for the period 1974 to 1993. Diagram on the top-right side shows 
the anomaly of salinity used as forcing factor. 
Page 130, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
Figure 2 shows simulations performed which, for 
the case of shrimp, exhibit an unstable behavior 
at the end of the period. This unstable behavior is 
a consequence of environmental effects plus the 
fishing stress imposed by the fishery. Ramírez-
Rodríguez et al. (2000a, b) explain this in terms 
of the impact of the forcing factors on recruitment 
patterns and reproduction success. In terms of 
the model, simulations appears to fit independent 
data reasonably well. 
 
Comparing Strategies 
 
Table 1 summarizes outputs of different strategies 
with respect to their impact on biomasses. In 
general terms the most  important stocks, 
from the fishing point of view, shrimp, 
groupers and snappers  were always posi-
tively impacted for all strategies, or at 
least not strongly af ected in a negative 
sense. Except for Strategy 4 (optimizing 
ecological benefits), all strategies imply 
negative effects on at least one stock, tak-
ing as a criterion reduction of biomass be-
low 20% of that of the base scenario. 
Strategy 5, optimizing three criteria simul-
taneously, represents the next best strat-
egy in terms of biomass. Seven stocks in-
crease in biomass wh ile two decrease, but 
one of them disappears (sharks). Strate-
gies 6, 7 and 8 (optimiz ing two criteria) show 4 
stocks increased and seven decreased, with one of 
them disappearing (sharks). 
 
As expected, biomasses decrease with trophic 
level for all strategies, at a rate of around 12% 
(Fig. 3a), corresponding roughly to the transfer 
efficency suggested by Pauly and Christensen 
(1995); but also refecting harvesting strategies. 
Coefficients of variation of biomass for the differ-
ent strategies tend to increase with TL, with the 
exception of strategy 3 (maximize jobs), which 
decreases with trophic level. This behavior is 
likely due to the construction of the social index 
(Job/Catch), and suggests lower uncertainty in 
Table 1. Simulated average biomass (top) and its coefficient of  variation (bottom) for commercial groups on the 
Campeche Sound, Southern Gulf of Mexi co, for different harvesting strategies (S#). $, J and E indicate optimization 
for economic, job and ecosystrem criteria. Biomasses decrea sing below 20% of starting biomass are between brackets. 
Bold numbers indicate higher values of biomass with respect to the starting value (For explanation see text). 
 
Average biomass 
 Her Jac Mac Fla Cat Moj Sna Cro Gro Gru Sha O_f Squ Shr 
S1 (=base) 6.18 1.84 1.08 0.91 0.70  0.85 0.11 0.46 0.47 0. 23 0.09 0.53 0.11 1.41 
S2 (=M$) 3.18 1.69 0.36 1.51 (0.04) (0.04) 0.13 (0.10) 0.72 (0.10) 0.12 0.22 0.04 1.91 
S3 (=MJ) 5.65 (0.10) (0.02) 1.66 (0.04) (0.04) 0.12 (0.10) 0.51 (0.10) (0.00) 0.40 0.12 2.05 
S4 (=ME) 6.57 1.84 1.17 0.85 0.80 0.93 0.10 0.48 0.46 0.24 0.09 0.54 0.12 1.00 
S5 (=M$JE) 6.47 1.75 0.56 1.20 0.27 0.40 0.11 0.10 0.48 (0.05) (0.00) 0.56 0.14 1.74 
S6 (=M$J) (0.24) (0.31) (0.02) 2.23 (0.03) (0.02) 0.12 (0.10) 0.62 (0.10) (0.00) 0.19 0.07 2.45 
S7 (=MJE) 5.70 (0.10) (0.02) 1.66 (0.04) (0.04) 0.08 (0.10) 0.49 (0.10) (0.00) 0.30 0.08 0.90 
S8 (=M$E) (0.25) 0.47 (0.03) 2.18 (0.03) (0.02) 0.12 (0.10) 0.64 (0.10) (0.00) 0.19 0.06 2.35 
Coefficient of variation 
 Her Jac Mac Fla Cat Moj Sna Cro Gro Gru Sha O_f Squ Shr 
S1 (=base) 16.92 8.63 17.61 2.62 15.37 16.05 24.05 23.40 15.29 23.14 22.43 9.00 13.68 29.22 
S2 (=M$) 18.37 6.94 38.20 17.79 (263.6) (287.54) 32.85 (362.28) 22.34 (310.77) 14.34 37.51 51.13 26.57 
S3 (=MJ) 5.65 (0.10) (0.02) 1.66 (0.04) (0.04) 0.12 (0.01) 0.51 (0.01) (0.00) 0.40 0.12 2.05 
S4 (=ME) 2.50 2.46 1.80 4.43 4.17 2.28 23.31 11.93 14.83 14.84 5.42 3.95 6.10 52.15 
S5 (=M$JE) 5.12 2.81 14.91 9.26 52.66 28.26 25.73 88.80 14.45 (93.26) (319.72) 7.63 12.30 25.06 
S6 (=M$J) (256.76) (111.83) (479.16) 28.57 (361.14) (432.93) 30.58 (510.11) 22.58 (433.27) (770.08) 40.10 51.91 31.43 
S7 (=MJE) 12.10 (284.0) (630.10) 21.31 (281.73) (323.14) 20.16 (416.22) 16.06 (353.73) (871.72) 11.50 14.29 68.97 
S8 (=M$E) (249.05) 71.57 (439.75) 28.17 (356.98) (426.51) 30.24 (503.85) 23.01 (428.12) (701.42) 42.76 53.03 32.23 
Her = Herrings, Jac = Jacks, Mac = Mackerels, Fla = Flatfish, Cat = Catfish, Moj = Mojarra, Sna = Snappers, Cro = Croakers, Gro  = 
Groupers, Gru = Grunts, Sha = Sharks, O_f = Other fish, Squ = Squids, and Shr = Shrimps. 
Table 2  Mean trophic level of the ecosystem computed for simu-
lated harvesting strategies and changes in vulnerability (Vul) to 
predation. Low value between brackets; higher value in bold. $, J 
and E represent economic, job and ecosystem stability criteria. S#’s 
represent strategies (for explanation see text)
 
 
 Control Type Vul = 0.2 Vul = 0.3 Vul = 0.4 Vul = 0.7 
Strategies (bottom-up) (mi xed) (mixed) (top-down) 
S1 (=base) - 2.330 - -
S2 (=M$) (2.200) 2.282 2.345 2.446 
S3 (=MJ) 2.204 2.274 2.309 2.461 
S4 (=ME) 2.326 2.336 2.330 2.325 
S5 (=M$JE) 2.215 2.319 2.346 2.349 
S6 (=M$J) - 2.228 - - 
S7 (=MJE) - 2.268 - - 
S8 (=M$E) - 2.229 - - 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 131  
employment if fisheries target high trophic levels 
(Fig. 3b). 
 
With respect to the fleets, the ratio between the 
last year of simulation to the starting year was 
used to evaluate the relative effect of the harvest 
strategies. The only fleet which improves biomass 
under all strategies was the artisanal fishery tar-
geting demersal fishes (art-DEM 
HL), which captures mostly high-
priced species. The strategy which 
shows the best overall condition for 
all fleets was that which optimizes 
economic criteria (S trategy 2), but it 
is not a clear improvement on the 
base scenario. 
 
Changes in vulnerability to predation 
suggest that mixed control involves 
less uncertainty in biomasses (ex-
pressed by the coefficient of varia-
tion) than ‘bottom-up’ or ‘top-down’ 
controls. For bottom-up control 
(V=0.2), higher uncertainty was ob-
served for intermediate trophic lev-
els. For top-down control (V=0.7), 
higher uncertainty was associated 
with higher trophic levels. However, 
a relatively constant, low uncertainty 
was observed for mixed control (Fig. 
4). These aspects should be given fur-
ther investigation because ecosystem 
mechanisms behind the observed 
behaviour could explain what hap-
pens in those cases where top preda-
tors have been removed from the 
ecosystem.
 
 
Mean trophic level of the ecosystem (MTLE) was 
computed for a different combination of strate-
gies and vulnerabilities (Table 2). Strategies, 
which optimize  economic yield and jobs show a 
proportional increase of MTLE with vulnerability. 
A strategy optimizing the three criteria shows a 
decrease in MTLE with low vulnerability (v = 0.2) 
corresponding to ‘bottom-up control’, but no 
AB
0.01
0.10
1.00
10.00
100.00
012345
Trophic level
Log Biomass
0.1
1
10
100
1000
012345
Trophic level
Log CVB
0.0001
0.01
1
100
012345
Trophic Level
Log CVB
JOBS
Figure 3.  Changes in biomass (A) and the corresponding coefficien t of variation (B) with trophic level for different 
harvesting strategies simulated with Ecosim. White dots are for strategy 1 (base scenario). Note the inverse relation-
ship when jobs are optimazed (for explanation see text). 
Figure. 4. Effect of changes in vulnerability in Strategy 2 (optimizing the 
economic criterion). A) on group bi omasses, and B) on uncertainty of 
biomass by trophic level. Low values for vulnerability, v=0.2 (dashed line 
and black squares) indicate bottom-up control; high values, v=0.7 (thin 
line and white circles) top-down and intermediate values mixed control, 
v=0.4 (bold line and white squares).  
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.10
1.00
10.00
100.00
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
Functional group
Log biomass
A
0
250
500
750
1000
012345
Trophic Level
CVB
B
Page 132, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
change was produced for mixed and ‘top-down 
control’ (v ≥ 0.3). Strategy 4, optimizing ecosys-
tem stability, did not change with vulnerability 
(Fig. 5). 
 
Starting simulations with current  
F’s vs. Random F’s 
 
The reason for this test was to observe the effect 
of running a given strategy by using a predefined 
F (i.e. current fishing mortality) to initiate simu-
lations. The use of random values of F will gener-
ate a number of iterations, which could change 
the way in which a simulation approaches the so-
lution of the objective function. In all the cases, 
the results at the end of the simulation were the 
same. Further work on simulations will initiated 
by using random F. 
 
Closed loop simulations 
 
For this analysis, uncertainty was incorpo-
rated through the coefficient of variation as-
sociated with each group. The fleet impact 
on the ecosystem was also provided by a 
weighting factor, in this case I assumed that 
the artisanal fleet do not cause an impact 
(factor = 1X), while the shrimp fleet factor 
was 3X. Changes in catchability with time 
were also considered in different ways. The 
upper and lower bounds in biomass of the 
groups were used as biological reference 
points to evaluate the state of the stock. 
Conditions for simulations are defined in 
Table 3. 
 
For all the strategies, the shrimp stock be-
comes unstable in the last years of simula-
tion, but this behaviour is associated with forcing 
factors as mentioned previously. For the two sce-
narios related to Strategy  5, croakers and grunts 
fall below the level of 0.5B at the end of the simu-
lated period; while sharks fall below this level, 
disappearing before year 10 of the simulation 
(Figure 6). For Strategy 4, and with the exception 
of shrimp, there no stocks declined below the ref-
erence  point of 0.5B (Fig. 7). 
 
Performance index  
 
The weighted total objective performance was 
computed for each scenario mentioned above, 
and same selected outputs are shown in Table 4.  
 
Discussion 
 
Table 3. Conditions established for harvesting scenarios during close loop simulations. 
 CV RIF max ∆q wfS 
Strategy 4, optimizing economic rent, jobs and ecosystem stability 
Scenario 1 0.2 all ( groups) 1 all 0.1 all 1 
Scenario 2 0.2 all 3 Shrimp, 1 others 0.2 Shrimp, 0.05 others 1 
Scenario 3 0.2 all 1 all 0.1 all 5 
Scenario 4 0.2 all 3 Shrimp, 1 others 0.2 Shrimp, 0.05 others 5 
Scenario 10 0.4 Shrimp, 0.2 all 3 Shrimp, 1 others 0.2 Shrimp, 0.05 others 1 
Scenario 11 0.4 Shrimp, 0.2 all 3 Shrimp, 1 others 0.2 Shrimp, 0.05 others 5 
Strategy 3, optimizing ecosystem stability
Scenario 5 0.2 all 1 all 0.1 all 1 
Scenario 6 0.2 all 3 Shrimp, 1 others 0.2 Shrimp, 0.05 others 1 
Scenario 7 0.2 all 1 all 0.1 all 5 
Scenario 8 0.2 all 3 Shrimp, 1 others 0.2 Shrimp, 0.05 others 5 
Scenario 9 0.4 Shrimp, 0.2 all 3 Shrimp, 1 others 0.2 Shrimp, 0.05 others 5 
CV = coefficient of variation, RIF = relative impact of the fishery, max ∆q = maximum rate of catchability increase. WfS = ecologi-
cal weighting factor assigned to Shrimp group at the beginning of simulations. 
2.15
2.20
2.25
2.30
2.35
2.40
2.45
2.50
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8
vulnerability
MTLE
Figure. 5 Changes in the mean trophic level for the ecosystem 
(MTLE) as a function of vulnerability. Strategy maximizing eco-
system stability is not affected (bold line); Strategies maximizing 
economic rent and jobs increase  in proportion to vulnerabil-
ity(dashed and dotted lines, resp ectively). Strategy optimizing 
the three criteria (thin line) increases for transition between bot-
tom-up to mixed control, and remains stable from mixed to top-
down control.
 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 133  
Currently, Ecopath with Ecosim constitutes a 
useful tool to explore harvesting strategies. 
The incorporation of independent estimations 
of biomass and fishing patterns provides an 
important possibility fo r its use for exploring 
management strategies. Moreover, the 
application of objective functions to optimize 
single or multiple criteria, the impact of 
fleets, changes in catchability with time as 
well as uncertainty, give a good opportunity 
to consider an ecosystem framework for 
management purposes. 
 
Simulated strategies give a number of scenar-
ios concerning changes in ecosystem pools, 
which change in different ways. Strategy 4 
(optimizing ecosystem stability) was the only 
option which did not provoke decline in the 
biomass of any group; moreover, biomass in-
creased in most of them. Moreover, the most 
important resources, shrimp, groupers and 
snappers were reduce d under any strategy 
tested. However, groups like grunts, croakers, 
mojarra, catfish and sharks were reduced un-
der most strategies, as measured by a decline 
in biomass below 20% of base scenario 
(Strategy 1). Sharks disappeared in most 
cases. It was also noticed that when a simula-
tion optimized only two criteria, several 
groups were reduced, but with high uncer-
tainty, as expressed by the coefficient of varia-
tion (Table 1). 
 
Decrease of biomass with trophic level (Fig. 
3a) for all strategies appears to be associated 
with transfer efficiencies. However, those 
data also reflect fishing stress imposed by exploi-
tation, suggesting that the rate of change could be 
lower for unexploited systems. This could be an 
impact on biodiversity. In this sense, more inves-
tigation is required. 
 
Vulnerability to predation, related to the type of 
biomass-flows control, suggests that, for mixed 
control, uncertainty decreases, while the opposite 
applies to top-down or bottom-up control. This 
uncertainty also suggests that a more stable sys-
tem might obtain under mixed control. 
 
This is a research line to be explored, because it 
could be associated with removal large predators 
in an ecosystem, such as has occurred in some 
collapsed fisheries. 
 
Ar present, the problem 
o f  t h e  p i n k  s h r i m p  (F. 
duorarum) fishery in 
Campeche Sound is a 
great challenge for scien-
tists, managers and fish-
ers in Mexico. The main 
question here is, what 
can we do to rebuild this 
fishery? 
 
Initially the role of the 
forcing factors is ex-
tremely important creat-
Table 4. Weighted total performance indices for simulation of harvesting strategies. 
 
Criteria 
Strategy 5 
max ($JE) 
Scenario 4 
Strategy 4 
max  (ME) 
Scenario 9 
Strategy 5 
max ($JE) 
Scenario 11 
 Open 
Loop 
Closed 
Loop 
Open 
Loop 
Closed 
Loop 
Open 
Loop 
Closed 
Loop 
Net Economic Value 3012.81 2486.52 420.1 7 1733.4 3012.95 2531.03 
Social value (employ.) 2887.83 2047 .38 1645.64 1586.6 2887.84 2069.5 
Ecosystem stability -44.46 -43.61  -23.1 -21.06 -44.46 -43.97 
Overall value 0.66 0.4 -0.23 -0.21 0.66 0.41 
Relative index (Close Loop / Open Loop) 
Net Economic Value  0.825  4.125  0.840 
Social (employ.) value  0.709  0.964  0.717 
Ecosystem stability  0.981  0.912  0.989 
Overall value  0.606  0.913  0.621 
Figure  6  7   
Figure 6. Simulated biomasses from close loop simulation 
for Strategy 4 (optimizing economic, jobs and ecosystem crite-
ria) under the following conditions: a) assigning a factor of 1 
to ecosystem criteria as well as for the shrimp group. b) As-
signing uncertainty to biomass for each group as CV = 20%. c) 
Shrimp fleet impact ecosystem three times respect to the ar-
tisanal fleets. d) Catchability for artisanal fleets increases 5% 
each year while for shrimp fleet 20%. e) Reference biological 
level of biomass (dashed lines) fixed at 0.5B and 2.0B. Note 
that Croakers, Grunts and Sharks fall below critical level of 
0.5B, and Shrimps maintain larg e uncertainty during the last 
period because the effect of forcing factors.
 

Page 134, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
ing both low stock abundance and uncer-
tain biomass and fishery behavior (Figure 
2) at the end of the period. During The 
simulations measured social impact as the 
Job/Catch ratio. In the shrimp fishery, 
employment is now around 10%  of that in 
the mid-1970’s, while yields have col-
lapsed. Evidently, some fishers have con-
tinued fishing despite low yields, a chnge 
that can modify the Job/Catch ratio. Some 
looked for alternative fishing jobs, adding 
fishing pressure to alternative fish re-
sources. Some other fishers migrated to 
other sectors. These social dynamics are 
not captured by the fixed values in the 
simulation model.  
 
In general terms, best option from the si-
mautions is Strategy 4 (Fig. 7), which op-
timizes the ecosystem stability criteria. 
Other options tested, such as optimizing 
economic, social and ecological criteria 
simultaneously, yield some undesirable 
scenarios, since some stocks decline and 
sharks tend to disappear.  
 
Acknowledgments 
 
I would like to acknow ledge to Dr. Kevern 
Cochran from FAO for his invitation to partici-
pate in the FAO / UBC Fisheries Centre work-
shop on “The use of ecosystem models to in-
vestigate multispecies management strategies 
for capture fisheries”. Thanks also to the Japan 
Government who financed me for this activity, 
and to the National Polytechnic Institute, Mex-
ico, for partial support through CEGEPI-
980056 project, COFAA and EDI.
 
 
References 
 
Arreguín-Sánchez, F. 2000.  Octopus-red grouper in-
teraction in the exploited ecosystem of the north-
ern continental shelf of Yucatan, Mexico. Ecologi-
cal Modelling (in press). 
Christensen, V. and D. Pauly. 1992. Ecopath II- a soft-
ware for balancing steady  – state ecosystem mod-
els and calculating network characteristics. Eco-
logical Modelling 61: 169-185 
Hilborn, R. and C. J. Walters. 1992. Quantitative fisher-
ies stock assessment. Chapman and Hall. New 
York, 570pp. 
Manikchand-Haileman, S., L.A. Soto and E. Escobar. 
1998. A preliminary trophic model of the continen-
tal shelf, South-western Gulf of Mexico. Estuarine, 
coastal and shelf Science. 46: 885-899 
Pauly, D. and V. Christensen. 1995. Primary production 
required to sustain global  fisheries. Nature 373: 
255-257 
Ramírez-Rodríguez, F. Arreguín-Sánchez and D. Lluch-
Belda. 2000a. Collapse of the pink shrimp Far-
fantepenaeus duorarum(Burkenroad, 1939) fishery 
and sea surface temperature in Southern Gulf of 
Mexico. (submitted to Fish. Bull.) 
Ramírez-Rodríguez, M. E.A. Chávez and F. Arreguín-
Sánchez. 2000b. Perspective of the pink shrimp 
(Farfantepenaeus duorarum Burkenroad) fishery 
of the Campeche Bank, Mexico. Ciencias Marinas, 
26(1):97-112 
Schaefer, M. B. 1957. A study on the dynamics of the 
fishery for yellowfin tuna in the eastern tropical 
Pacific Ocean. Inter-Am. Trop. Tuna Comm. Bull. 
2:247-285 
SEMARNAP. 1998. Anuario estadístico de pesca 1997. 
Secretaría de Medio Ambiente, Recursos Naturales 
y Pesca. México. 241pp. 
Walters, C., V. Christensen and D. Pauly. 1997. Struc-
turing dynamic models of exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balanc e assessments. Reviews 
in Fish Biology and Fisheries. 7: 1-34 
 
Figure. 7 Simulated biomasses from cl ose loop simulation for 
Strategy 3 (optimizing ecosyste m criteria) under the following 
conditions: a) assigning a factor of  5 to ecosystem criteria as well 
as  for the shrimp group. b) Assigning uncertainty to biomass for 
e a c h  g r o u p  a s  C V  =  2 0 % ,  e x c e p t  f o r  s h r i m p  w i t h  C V  =  4 0 % .  c )  
Shrimp fleet impact ecosystem three times respect to the artisanal 
fleets. d) Catchability for artisana l fleets increases 5% each year 
while for shrimp fleet 20%. e) Reference biological level of bio-
mass (dashed lines) fixed at 0.5B  and 2.0B. Note that Croakers, 
Grunts and Sharks remains at "health" levels of biomass (>0.5B), 
and Shrimps maintain uncertainty during the last period because 
the effect of forcing factors.
 

FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 135  
Evaluating harvesting strategies 
for fisheries in the Central Gulf of 
California ecosystem 
 
 
Francisco Arreguín-Sánchez
1 and  
Luis E. Calderón-Aguilera2 
1CICIMAR, La Paz, Mexico 
2CICESE, Ensenada, Mexico 
 
Abstract 
 
Harvesting strategies were tested for fisheries of the 
west-central region of the Gulf of California. Simula-
tions using Ecosim were based on a previously con-
structed Ecopath model emphasizing the benthic com-
munity and accounting for trawled shrimp and its by-
catch,.sardine and multispecies small-scale fisheries. In 
order to calibrate simulated biomasses, time series of 
catch-per-unit-effort and exploitation patterns for the 
shrimp and sardine fisheries were incorporated. Simu-
lated harvesting scenarios consider economic value, so-
cial value (employment), ecosystem stability attributes, 
and all of these values combined, as criteria for optimi-
zation. Uncertainty per group, catchability changes 
with time and relative impact per fleet were also con-
sidered. Two weighting fact ors were compared for the 
ecosystem stability criterion; the conservation of ma-
rine mammals and sea birds, and the B/P ratio per 
group. Simulations emphasising conservation indicate 
that maximization of ecosystem stability is the only 
reasonable strategy, because other criteria imply deple-
tion of some stocks, and even cause some of them dis-
appear. Outputs based on the B/P ratio resulted in only 
one non-desirable outcome (when the employment cri-
terion was maximised). Here  some stocks were de-
pleted or disappeared, while other criteria offered rea-
sonable alternatives. The overall performance index re-
sulted in the same value for both scenarios, but indi-
vidual criteria suggest that  scenarios based on the B/P 
ratio offer better possibilities  
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
The central Gulf of California (GoC) is a heavily 
exploited marine ecosystem. Native people have 
fished the abundant resources of this productive 
area since pre-Spanish times (Edwards 1978). The 
GoC is divided into four different regions accord-
ing to topography and physical processes: the 
mouth, the southern (also called central) GoC, the 
northern GoC, and the upper GoC (Lavín et al.  
1 9 9 7 ) .  T h i s  c o n t r i b u t i o n  is aimed at the explora-
tion of management strategies of fisheries in the 
central GoC within an ecosystem approach based 
on the Ecopath with Ecosim software (Christen-
sen et al. 2000), which incorporates formal opti-
mization routines. 
 
 
Methods 
 
Model description 
 
This ecosystem analysis emphasizes benthic 
communities where shrimp trawl and other im-
portant fisheries operate, such as those targeting 
Monterrey sardine ( Sardinops caerulea ) and gi-
ant squid (Dosidiscus gigas). Data on biomass for 
the benthic components of the ecosystem comes 
from Pérez-Mellado and Findley (1985), who col-
lected catch and by-catch data from 290 hauls 
made between Sept. 1978 and March 1979. 
 
An Ecopath mass-balance model for the central  
GoC ecosystem was constructed by Arreguín-
Sánchez et al. (2000). It consists of 27 functional 
groups which were selected on criteria such as 
species abundance, by-catch structure, and the 
economic importance of the species. One group 
covers marine mammals, one represents aquatic 
birds, one for sharks and rays, and 11 for fish. For 
invertebrates, 2 groups are mollusks, 5 are mac-
rocrustaceans, 2 are small invertebrates, and one 
is zooplankton. Phytoplankton and detritus rep-
resent primary producers. By-catch is explicitly 
identified as a non-living group named ‘discarded 
fish’ (Figure 1). We assumed that by-caught fish 
die on board, while most macrocrustaceans and 
mollusks remain alive. Practically all by-catch is 
returned to the sea after shrimp have been sorted 
from trawl hauls.
 
 
The fisheries in the ecosystem were grouped in 
three fleets. The first is a trawling shrimp fleet, 
mainly exploiting penaeid shrimp as target spe-
cies. The shrimp fishery, the most profitable in 
the GoC, targets two species, brown shrimp  Far-
fantepenaeus californiensis  (Holmes 1900) and 
blue shrimp Litopenaeus stylirostris  (Stimpson 
1871). The latter comprise over 80 % of total 
shrimp catch (Snyder-Conn and Brusca. 1975; 
Mathews 1981), although in some years there are 
sharp changes in catch composition (Calderon-
Aguilera and Burgueño-Aburto, 1993; Calderon-
Aguilera and Campoy-Favela, 1993). 
 
Two other fishing fleets were considered in the 
model. A small pelagics fleet, mainly fishing the 
Monterrey sardine, and a small-scale fleet. The 
latter has a number of target species, of which the 
giant squid is the most important, along with sev-
eral species of Serranids and Lutjanids (Table 1). 
 
Page 136, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
Testing harvesting strategies 
 
Five harvesting strategies were tested using Eco-
sim (e.g. Pauly, 1998) aimed at different objec-
tives. In  the  first strategy, optimization was done 
without any selection of criteria, but based on the 
historical trend. The other four strategies opti-
mize some criteria such as: the economic value 
,ecosystem stability ,social value (measured as 
employment) and, the fifth scenario, the previous 
three objectives combined. 
 
In addition, three different vulnerabilities to pre-
dation were tried: v=0.4 representing mixed con-
trol (set as default for optimization). ‘Bottom-up’ 
and ‘top-down’ control were represented with 
values v=0.2 and v=0.7, respectively. 
 
For the simulations, the social criterion was de-
fined per fleet as follows;  small-scale catches do 
not generate important profits but provide jobs at 
a rate of 10 jobs/catch value. Comparatively, the 
shrimp fishery was set at 0.5 jobs/catch value and 
the sardine fishery at 0.1 jobs/catch value. 
 
For ecosystem stability, the weighted value of ma-
rine mammals and birds was set to 1 while the 
rest of the groups got 0. This was to emphasize 
the importance of conservation for mammals and 
birds, but allowing the captures of others. In the 
second case, the importance of all groups was 
weighted by B/P. 
 
For all strategies, the mean trophic level of the 
ecosystem, MTLE, was computed based on simu-
lated biomasses. The index was constructed as: 
 
∑∑
== 




=
n
1i i
n
1i ii BTLBMTLE  
 
Table. 1 Commercial catch (g m -2) per fleet of groups 
considered in the model. Trophic level =TL. 
 
Group \ catch 
 
TL 
Small 
Scale
Shrimp 
Trawl 
Sar-
dine 
Total 
catch 
Sea mammals 4.0   0 
Sea birds 3.9    0 
Sciaenidae 3.5 0.032 0.025  0.06 
Scombridae 3.7 0.092 0.001  0.09 
Sharks / Rays 3.9 0.061 0  0.06 
Squid 3.7 0.367   0.37 
Carangidae 3.5 0.001 0.001  0 
Serranidae 3.4 0.18 0.18  0.36 
Scorp/Triglidae 3.3  0.062  0.06 
Other fish 3.2 0.054 0.054  0.11 
Haemulidae 3.2 0.001 0.196  0.2 
Clupaeidae 3.0  0.005 14.5 14.51 
Lutjanidae 2.9 0.008 0  0.01 
Paralichthydae 2.7 0.126 0.126  0.25 
Myctophidae 2.7  0  0 
Shrimp 2.3  1.432  1.43 
Crabs 2.4 0.203   0.2 
Total catch  1.125 2.081 14.5 17.706 
Trophic level  3.28 2.6 3.02 2.99 
Figure. 1 Flows of biomass diagram for the ecosystem of the west-central coast of the Gulf of California, Mexico. 
Biomass (B), Consumption (Q) and fishery harvest are in g m-2 wet weight; all flows and production are in g m-2 year-1 
(from Arreguín-Sánchez et al., 2000, unpublished). 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 137  
where B = biomass, TL = the 
mean trophic level, i = 
stock/group index. 
 
Two forms of optimization 
were conducted; an ‘open loop’ 
situation where criteria were 
optimized following a nonlin-
ear optimization procedure 
known as the Davidson-
Fletcher-Powell (DFP) method 
(see Christensen et al.  2000). 
The second level, named 
‘closed loop’, where, under the 
open loop framework, 
catchability changes and uncer-
tainty in group biomass were 
also considered. 
 
Results 
 
Independent time series of 
biomass and exploitation pat-
tern for the period of 1965 to 
1997 were used to compare observed versus Eco-
sim-simulated biomasses for shrimp (Figure 2) 
and sardine (Figure 3) fisheries. In both cases fit-
ting results appear to be a reasonable representa-
tion by Ecosim. 
 
 
Outputs for the open loop simulations are shown 
in Table 2 in terms of biomass per group for dif-
ferent harvesting strategi es and vulnerabilities to 
predation. For the current situation (expressed by 
mixed control, v=0.4 in Table 2), strategies that 
resulted in higher biomasses for most groups 
were those that maximize ecosystem and social 
criteria. 
 
Under bottom-up and top-
down control, the scenario 
represented by optimization 
of employment was the one 
where most groups increase 
in biomass.  
 
Such optimizations include 
exploited species as well as 
conservation of sea mammals 
and sea birds. Commercially 
important groups, such as 
shrimp, lutjanids and clu-
peoids reached their maxi-
mum biomasses under dif-
ferent criteria depending on 
the strategy, however most of 
their biomasses were maxi-
mized under ‘top-down’ con-
trol. The scenario that maxi-
mized total ecosystem bio-
mass was when optimizing 
employment criterion under 
‘top-down’ control. 
  
Figure. 2 Ecosim simulated biomass (wavy line) contrasted with inde-
pendent estimates of catch-per-unit-effort (dots) and fishing pattern (black 
bars at bottom) for the brown shrimp (F. californiensis) of the Gulf of Cali-
fornia, Mexico, for the period 1965 to 1984. 
Figure. 3 Ecosim simulated biomass (wavy line) contrasted with independ-
ent estimates of catch-per-unit-effort (d ots) and fishing pattern (black bars 
at bottom) for the Monterrey sardine (S. caeruleus) in the Gulf of California, 
Mexico, for the period 1969 to 1984. 
Page 138, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
 
Table 2. Gulf of California: estima ted biomasses per group (g m -2) for different harvesting strategi es and vulnerabilities to predat ion. Bold numbers/light shading 
indicate highest values between criteria for each type of flow control (=vulnerability). AC=all objectives combined. 
 
 Mixed control (v=0.4)  ‘Bottom-up’ cont rol (v=0.2)  ‘Top-down’ control (v=0.7) 
Biomass Group Economic Ecosystem Social AC  Economic  Ecosystem Social AC  Economic Ecosystem Social AC 
Sea mammals 0.013 0.022 0.023 0.022 0.013 0.019 0.055 0.019  0.010 0.012 0.191 0.033 
Sea birds 0.012 0.019 0.016 0.018 0.011 0.016 0.047 0.016  0.009 0.012 0.140 0.026 
Sciaenidae 0.122 0.396 1.529 0.435 0.289 0.384 0.011 0.438  0.041 0.162 3.011 0.237 
Scombridae 0.198 0.336 0.560 0.350 0.263 0.351 0.002 0.364  0.063 0.257 0.008 0.192 
Sharks / Rays 0.232 0.236 0.041 0.217 0.140 0.214 0.001 0.162  0.316 0.206 0.003 0.364 
Squid 1.124 1.585 1.513 1.607 0.943 1.419 0.019 1.396  0.880 1.064 1.971 2.033 
Carangidae 0.975 1.006 1.409 1.097 0.840 1.032 2.901 1.041  2.108 0.941 2.537 1.064 
Serranidae 0.492 0.352 0.306 0.404 0.262 0.351 0.002 0.273  0.647 0.370 0.004 0.552 
Scorp/Trigl. 0.127 0.129 0.347 0.169 0.097 0.127 0.097 0.130  0.101 0.095 0.244 0.067 
Other fish 1.846 2.538 2.045 2.334 2.099 2.470 4.685 2.525  1.132 2.220 4.219 1.846 
Haemulidae 0.318 0.402 0.558 0.425 0.316 0.370 0.365 0.377  0.172 0.325 0.801 0.390 
Clupaeidae 9.575 12.952 12.946 12.894 9.283 11.786 31.237 11.827  5.026 9.957 36.733 14.028 
Lutjanidae 0.119 0.170 0.070 0.130 0.185 0.185 0.011 0.192  0.043 0.156 0.021 0.042 
Paralichthydae 0.880 0.598 0.705 0.737 0.442 0.571 0.005 0.458  1.314 0.611 0.014 1.372 
Other molluscs 0.551 0.672 0.957 0.696 0.726 0.670 0.977 0.708  0.456 0.819 5.000 1.229 
Myctophidae 1.123 0.839 0.381 0.787 0.883 0.847 1.136 0.848  2.724 1.244 0.143 0.108 
O. macrocrust. 0.415 0.426 0.332 0.370 0.516 0.476 0.756 0.497  0.081 0.433 0.276 0.044 
Red crab 0.040 0.051 0.084 0.053 0.061 0.058 0.080 0.061  0.006 0.041 0.319 0.017 
Shrimp 0.583 0.860 0.790 0.845 0.467 0.651 0.562 0.655  0.882 0.535 1.119 1.444 
Crabs 0.262 0.324 0.291 0.295 0.366 0.347 0.002 0.354  0.038 0.282 0.005 0.066 
Polychaeta 0.524 0.584 0.636 0.572 0.635 0.607 0.736 0.623  0.263 0.661 1.252 0.438 
Stomatopods 0.010 0.014 0.003 0.008 0.021 0.018 0.030 0.019  0.002 0.020 0.009 0.004 
Meiobenthos 20.451 19.595 19.635 19.613 20.579 19.880 19.022 19.866  21.295 20.284 14.600 19.408 
Zooplankton 1.696 1.409 1.451 1.465 1.638 1.607 1.745 1.597  1.940 1.586 1.189 0.720 
Phytoplankton 25.797 26.889 26.871 26.877 25.870 26.338 26.885 26.345  24.182 25.911 38.377 27.607 
Discarded fish 19.929 19.915 0.621 18.491 19.584 19.797 22.980 19.305  21.219 19.521 17.582 21.958 
Detritus 16.992 17.693 17.637 17.647 17.041 17.289 17.514 17.293  16.116 17.100 22.334 18.750 
 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 139  
In general terms, higher values of MTLE were 
reached under the social criterion. Within this, 
the highest value was obtained when vulnerability 
to predation corresponded to a system under top-
down flow control (Table 3). This is mainly be-
cause this scenario resulted in the highest bio-
mass for most groups with respect other scenarios 
in Table 2. It is also interesting that this scenario 
(social optimization with top-down control) pro-
vides the larger number of jobs per catch, and fish 
species of higher trophic level (Table 1). 
 
Closed-loop simulation 
 
For this analysis, uncertainty was incorporated 
into simulated scenarios through the coefficient 
of variation (CV) of the biomass for each group 
(in the absence of specific data, we assumed a 
CV=20% for all groups). We assumed that fleets 
affected the ecosystem differently. The shrimp 
trawl fishery had a major impact, so we used a 
factor of 3X; the sardine fishery had a lower fac-
tor (2X); and we assumed a null impact (1X). for 
the small-scale fleet. Catchability was assumed to 
increase at a rate of 5%, 10% and 15% per year for 
small-scale, shrimp and sardine fleets. Upper and 
lower bounds of biomass of the groups were used 
as biological reference points to evaluate the state 
of the stocks during simulations. 
 
The main overall evaluation for the scenario 
where conservation of mammals and birds was 
emphasized is shown in Tables 4. Compared with 
the open loop simulation, net economic value was 
enhanced by 30%, 36% for social value and over-
all performance increased by 34%. However, eco-
system stability decreased 59% (Table 4). The 
reason for this is probably because the biomass of 
some groups was depleted below 50% of the 
original biomass, here assumed as a critical 
threshold for the stocks. (Figure 4). 
 
When the reciprocal of P/B per group was used as 
the weighting factor as a conservation criterion, 
the economic and social values, and the overall 
performance index, were similar, but ecosystem 
stability was greatly improved (Table 5).
 
 
Discussion 
 
Even when we accept the fitting of biomasses in 
Ecosim ( comparing observed versus simulated 
biomasses) as a reasonable procedure, the figures 
suggest some deviations in both clupeids and 
shrimp. For clupeids it is well known that inter-
annual stock variation is strongly associated with 
forcing factors (Nevárez-Martínez, 2000). Re-
garding the shrimp group, the fit appears to be 
better than clupeids, but we also noticed that the 
residuals suggest the influence of forcing factors 
(see also López-Martínez, 2000). Environmental 
data were not incorporated in the present case, 
but they must be further considered.  
 
Another aspect regarding th e time series is that 
we used catch-per-unit-effort as an index of stock 
abundance for both clupeids and shrimp, but we 
have no good evidence that this relationship ap-
plies. For simulations, vulnerability to predation 
shows a strong influence on biomasses. It sug-
gests that further consideration must be taken 
during calibration in order to im-
prove the fit. This is because we 
can expect changes in vulnerabil-
ity due to variation in biomass of 
the groups. 
 
During the closed loop simula-
tion, two scenarios were tested, as 
defined above, using weighting 
factors for conservation of marine 
mammals and sea-birds and the 
use of the reciprocal of P/B for all 
groups. Simulations were con-
ducted to explore maximization of 
three criteria, economic, social 
and ecosystem stability, as well as 
the combination of them. In the 
first scenario, some groups disap-
p e a r  b e f o r e  t h e  c o n c l u s i o n  o f  t h e  
Table 3. Summary of Mean Trophic Level for the Eco-
system under different harvesting strategies and vul-
nerabilities. 
 Vulnerability 
Strategy (Maximizing criteria) 0.2 0.4 0. 7 
Economic value ($) 1.67 1.68 1.65 
Ecosystem stability (E) 1.68 1.69 1.67 
Social Value (J) 1.82 1.85 1.88 
‘Big compromise’ ($EJ)  1.68 1.72 1.67 
Table. 5  Closed loop simulation weightin g all biomass groups by the B/P 
ratio. 
 
 
 
Criteria 
Open loop 
simulation  
w/o assess-
ment 
Means 
achieved 
through closed 
loop simulation 
% enhanced 
performance 
w/ perfect in-
formation 
Net economic value 427.84 294.69 31 
Social (employment) value 605.89 386.57 36 
Ecosystem stability -22.51 -20.7 8 
Overall performance 2.14 1.41 34 
Table. 4 Closed loop simulation emphasizing mammals and aquatic birds. 
 
 
 
Criteria 
Open loop 
simulation 
w/o  assess-
ment 
Means achieved 
through closed 
loop simulation 
% enhanced 
performance 
w/ perfect in-
formation 
Net economic value 381.59 267.11 30 
Social (employment) value 671.22 428.21 36 
Ecosystem stability -0.27 -0.7 59 
Overall performance 2.18 1.44 34 
Page 140, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
simulated period. The same happens when the 
three criteria are combined. Maximization of the 
social criterion resulted in some groups falling be-
low 0.5 of the original biomass. 
 
When the reciprocal of the P/B ratio was used as 
a weighting factor, aimed at maintaining the sta-
bility of the ecosystem, some stocks disappear 
when the social criterion was maximised. The 
reason for this is probably because optimization 
of employment implies a large number of fishers 
working on the fishable stock.  
 
The MTLE changes according to policy criterion 
and vulnerability to predation. In the first case 
criteria are associated to harvesting strategies, 
and significant changes should be demonstrated 
in further work as an index of the impact of fish-
ing on the ecosystem structure. Regarding vul-
nerability, we cannot manage, in practice, how 
ecosystems control flows of 
biomass. However, vulner-
ability to predation influ-
ences ecosystem function 
and it could have some effect 
on predictions. 
 
The overall performance in-
creased 34% through the 
losed loop simulation, re-
gardless of the weighting 
value given to the biomass 
groups. However, ecosystem 
stability greatly improved 
when they were weighted by 
the reciprocal of the P/B 
(Figure 5). 
 
Acknowledgments 
 
The first author acknowledges 
Dr Kevern Cochrane from FAO 
for his invitation to participate 
in the FAO/UBC Fisheries Cen-
tre workshop on ‘The use of eco-
system models to investigate 
multispecies management 
strategies for capture fisheries’. 
Thanks also to the Japanese 
Government who financed FA 
for this activity; and to the Na-
tional Polytechnic Institute, 
Mexico, for partial support 
through CEGEPI-980056 pro-
ject, COFAA and EDI; and to 
CONACyT through the project 
34865-B. 
 
Literature cited 
 
Calderon-Aguilera L.E. y J.C. 
Burgueño 1993. Análisis y evaluación de la situación 
actual de la pesquería de camarón (Penaeus sp) en 
el Golfo de California. Comunicaciones Académicas. 
Serie Ecología CICESE CIECT 9301. 
Calderon Aguilera, L.E. y J.R. Campoy Favela 1993. 
Bahia de Las Guasimas, Estero Los Algodones Y 
Bahia de Lobos, Sonora. Pages  411-419 in: Biodi-
versidad marina y costera de México. S.I. Salazar 
Vallejo y N.E. González (eds ). Com. Nal. Biodiversi-
dad y CIQRO, México, 865 pp. 
Christensen, V., C.J. Walter s, and D. Pauly. 2000. Eco-
p a t h  w i t h  E c o s i m  V e r s i o n  4 ,  H e l p  s y s t e m © .  U n i v .  
of British Columbia, Fish eries Centre, Vancouver, 
Canada and ICLARM, Penang, Malaysia. 
E d w a r d s ,  R .  R .  C .  1 9 7 8 .  E c o l o g y  o f  a  c o a s t a l  l a g o o n  
complex in Mexico. Estuarine and Coastal Marine 
Science. 6:75-92. 
Lavin, M., E. Beier and A. Badan. 1997. Estructura 
Hidrográfica y Circulación del Golfo de California: 
Escalas Estacional e Interanual. In: M.Lavin (Ed.) 
Contribuciones a la Oceano grafía Física en México. 
Monog.3. U. Geofísica Mex., pp. 139-169. 
Figure. 4 Simulated biomasses from close loop simulation for Strategy 4, opti-
mizing economic, jobs and ecosystem criteria combined, assigning a factor of 1 to 
marine mammals and sea birds to emphasize ecosystem criteria (other pools set 
0). Simulations were running considering a) uncertainty on biomass per group 
as CV = 20%. b) Relative impact of fleets using factor of 3, 2 and 1 for shrimp, 
sardine and small-scale, respectively. c) Catchability increases a maximum of 
5%, 10% and 15% for small-scale, shrimp and sardine fleets. e) Reference bio-
logical level of biomass (dashed lines) are fixed at 0.5B and 2.0B.
 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 141  
López-Martínez, J. 2000. 
Dinámica de la 
pesquería de camarón 
(Penaeus californiensis) 
en el litoral sonorense y 
su relación con algunos 
parámetros océano-
atmosféricos. Tesis 
Doctor en Ciencias, 
Centro Interdiscipli-
nario de Ciencias Mari-
nas del IPN, México. 
174p. 
Mathews C.P. 1981. A re-
view of the North 
American penaeid fish-
eries, with particular 
reference to Mexico. 
Kuwait Bulletin of Ma-
rine Science 2: 325-
409. 
Nevárez-Martínez, M.O. 
2000. Variabilidad de 
la población de sardina 
monterrey (Sardinops 
caeruleus) en el Golfo 
de California, México. 
Tesis Doctor en Cien-
cias, Centro Interdisci-
plinario de Ciencias 
Marinas del IPN, 
México. 103p. 
Pauly, D. (Editor). 1998. 
Use of Ecopath with 
Ecosim to evaluate 
strategies for sustain-
able exploitation of 
multi-species re-
sources. Fisheries Cen-
tre Research Reports 
6(2). 49 p.  
Perez-Mellado, J.L. and  
L.T. Findley. (1985).  
Evaluacion de la Ictio-
fauna del camarón cap-
turado en las costas de Sonora y norte de Sinaloa, 
México, Cap.5:201-254.In: Yañez-Arancibia, A. (Ed) 
Recursos Pesqueros Potenciales de México: La pe-
sca acompañante del camarón. Progr. Univ. de Ali-
mentos, Inst. Cienc. de l Mar y Limnol., I.N.P., 
UNAM, México D.F. 748 P. 
Snyder-Conn E. and R.C. Brusca. 1975. Shrimp popula-
tion dynamics and fishery impact in the northern 
Gulf of California. 1967-1968. Ciencias Marinas, 2 
(2): 54-67. 
 
Figure. 5 Simulated biomasses from close loop simulation for Strategy 4 (optimizing 
economic, jobs and ecosystem criteria), as signing B/P ratio as weighting factor for 
each group to emphasize ecosystem criteria . Simulations were running considering a) 
uncertainty on biomass per group as CV = 20%.  b) Relative impact of fleets using fac-
tor of 3, 2 and 1 for shrimp, sardine and smal l-scale, respectively. c) Catchability in-
creases a maximum of 5%, 10% and 15% for sm all-scale, shrimp and sardine fleets. d) 
Reference biological level of biomass (dashed lines) are fixed at 0.5B and 2.0B. 
Page 142, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
Testing responses of a tropical shelf 
ecosystem to fisheries  
management strategies:  
a small-scale fishery from the  
Colombian Caribbean Sea 
 
 
Luis Orlando Duarte1 and  
Camilo B. García2 
1  University of Concepción, Chile 
2 Universidad Nacional de Colombia, Santa 
Marta, Colombia. 
 
 
Abstract 
 
A mass balance model (Ecopath II) was constructed for 
the Gulf of Salamanca, a Colombian Caribbean shelf 
ecosystem, using mostly local information collected 
during 1997. The biological structure and social and 
economical characteristics of the artisanal fisheries 
were included in the analysis . Based on this model, re-
sponses of the ecosystem and the fishing performance 
were tested over 20-year Ecosim simulations. Four 
fishery management scenar ios maximized three inde-
pendent objective functions (fisheries profits, employ-
ment, and ecosystem structure) and the combination of 
the three objectives together. The social objective simu-
lation (employment) resulted in the most marked 
changes in the biomass distribution of the ecosystem 
components: predatory fishes, mul-
lets/catfishes and croakers/mojarras fell 
below 20 percent of their baseline values 
of biomass; whereas small pelagic fishes, 
triggerfishes/filefishes and snap-
pers/grunts increased more than two 
times their baseline values of biomass. 
Pelagic predatory fishes and mul-
lets/catfishes groups were removed in the 
economic (fisheries profits) and social 
maximizing simulation s. Including likely 
errors of stock assessment methods and 
their implementation (closed loop simu-
lations) would indicate risk to fall below 
20% of the initial biomass throughout the 
time of simulation for croakers/mojarras 
and porgies/ spadefishes during the eco-
nomic maximizing simulation and large 
demersal fishes during the social maxi-
mizing simulation. The social objective 
simulation generated the lowest predic-
tive economic value of the landings and 
the largest declines in the mean trophic 
level of the ecosystem. Good performance 
for ecosystem structure (no collapsed 
species), the economic value of the pre-
dicted landings and employment, were 
obtained maximizing the combination of 
the three functions.  
 
 
Introduction 
 
An artisanal fishery with few restrictions or con-
trols uses the Caribbean Coast in Colombia. Re-
cent trends of reduction of catches by the ar-
tisanal fishery in the Colombian Caribbean coast 
in the last decade (5886 tones landed in 1986 to 
4616 tones landed in 1995, INPA 1995) have 
made clear the need for implementing manage-
ment measures. 
 
The Gulf of Salamanca (GofS) ecosystem (11° 00' 
N to 11° 19' N and 74° 12' W to 74° 50' W; Fig. 1) is 
an example of the Colombian Caribbean shelf 
ecosystems according to its biological and physi-
cal structure and the social and economical char-
acteristics of the artisanal fisheries operating in 
this area. For the GofS, an expansion of the ar-
tisanal fishery depth range (at present within 0 to 
50-m depth limit) has been proposed. The system 
and its fisheries are multispecific. The manage-
ment policy should take into consideration this 
condition owing to the non-selective fisheries op-
erating in the Gulf (García et al. 1998) 
 
In addition, the comparison of this tropical shelf 
system with other similar systems might reveal 
some general ecosystem trends and characteris-
tics useful in integrated management. 
 
Table 1 . Input parameters for the trophic modeling of the Gulf o f 
Salamanca. Parameters calculated by ECOPATH II are presented in ital-
ics/shading. Fishes and epifauna biom ass were estimated by the swept area 
method from the captures with bottom  trawl samples. Zooplankton and in-
fauna biomass were derived from sampling results of plankton nets and dredge 
respectively. Fishes P/B ratio were included as equivalent of the total mortalit y 
(Allen, 1971). Fishes Q/B ratio were computed by means of the empirical model 
of Palomares and Pauly (1998) (García and Duarte, in press). Parameters ob-
tained from the literature are indicated: a- Arregin-Sanchez et al.  1993; b-
Polovina 1984; c- Manickhand-Heileman et al. 1998; d- Wolff  et al. 1998; e-
Osorio 1997; f- Manjarres et al.  1993; g- Tijaro et al.  1998; h- Sánchez et al.
1998; i- Chrisholm and Roff 1990. The predator–prey matrix was constructed 
basically from fish stomach content an alysis. This trophic information was 
gathered in digital format (CD; Duarte et al. 1999). 
 
 GROUP B P/B Q/B EE 
1 Phytoplankton 10.080 102.56 a - 0.700 
2 Macrophytes 0.053 11.00 b - 0.700 
3 Zooplankton 6.290 18.70 i 125.41 a d 0.643 
4 Infauna 15.000 7.00 27.00 a 0.975 
5 Epifauna 5.000 5.00 c d 19.00 a 0.868 
6 Shrimps 0.704 7.57 a 28.00 d 0.900 
7 Crabs 1.300 3.80 c 14.16 a 0.836 
8 Small pelagic fishes 0.835 3.37 e f 18.98 0.900 
9 Small demersal fishes 0.800 2.30 8.55 0.847 
10 Large demersal fishes 0.270 0.60 6.00 0.744 
11 Pelagic pred. fishes 0.330 0.91 8.80 0.956 
12 Rays/Sharks 0.040 0.60 c d 5.30 a d 0.050 
13 Mullets/Catfishes 0.150 1.00 g h 4.50 0.859 
14 Croackers/Mojarras 0.120 1.58 15.30 0.971 
15 Porgies/Spadefishes 0.280 0.76 11.85 0.924 
16 Trigger & file fish  0.480 0.80 7.39 0.532 
17 Snappers/Grunts 0.450 0.89 6.99 0.839 
18 Detritus - - - 0.666 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 143  
Fishery management cannot be tackled by fishery 
biologists alone. The scientific community in-
volved in management of ecosystems has recog-
nized the importance of including scientific, social 
and economic criterion in the management 
schemes (Mangel et al.  1996). Therefore, multi-
variate and interdisciplinary evaluations are 
needed to explore management policies. 
 
In this context, the dynamic ecosystem simulation 
included in Ecopath with Ecosim software (Wal-
ters et al. 1997, 2000) was used to test potential 
management strategies in  order to investigate 
whether the GofS fishery can be sustained and 
have economic importance. Four scenarios were 
evaluated over a 20-year simulation period: 
maximizing three independent objective func-
tions (fisheries profits, employment, and ecosys-
tem structure) and maxi mizing the combination 
of these three functions. 
 
Data Information Sources 
 
A mass balance model of 18 compartments for the 
GofS was constructed during 1997 using Ecopath 
II (Christensen and Pauly 1992; Fig. 2). The input 
parameters were mostly obtained from local in-
formation collected in three scientific cruises 
(February, July and November) carried out on the 
continental shelf (10 to 200 m depth; Table 1).  
 
Figure 1 . Study area, Gulf of Salamanca. A relatively 
small area (955 km 2) located in the central Colombian 
Caribbean Coast. 
Figure 2. A balanced trophic model of the Gulf of Salamanca ecosystem for 1997. All flows are in t/km2/year. The 
surface area of the boxes is proportional to the logarithm of the biomass represented. 
Page 144, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
The model emphasizes demersal and benthic eco-
logical groups due to the sampling methods used 
and the economic importance of these groups. 
The fished groups and their most important com-
ponents included in the analysis were: epifauna 
(Panulirus argus  Latreille 1804), shrimps 
(Xiphopenaeus kroyeri  Heller 1862), small pe-
lagic fishes (Cetengraulis edentulus Cuvier 1829), 
small demersal fishes ( Syacium, Polydactylus ), 
large demersal fishes ( Elops, Epinephelus ), pe-
lagic predatory fishes ( Sphyraena, Scombero-
morus, Caranx), croakers/mojarras ( Micropogo-
nias, Menticirrhus, Diapterus ), por-
gies/spadefishes ( Calamus, Chaetodipterus ), 
triggerfishes/ filefishes ( Balistes, Aluterus ) and 
snappers/grunts (Lutjanus, Conodon).
 
 
The fisheries input information is the product of 
the fishing assessment program developed by the 
Instituto Nacional de Pe sca y Acuicultura (INPA) 
and the VECEP-UE fisheries program. This in-
formation was gathered and analyzed by García et 
al. (1999) 
 
Table 2 shows the inventory of the fishing eco-
nomic units between 
December 1996 and 
January 1997 in the 
GofS. Wooden boats 
moved with oars 
and/or sails predomi-
nate. The most com-
mon fishing unit uses 
gillnets and the town 
with the greatest 
number of fishing 
units is Pueblo Viejo 
(see Fig. 1). 
 
Table 3 shows the list of the ten most abundant 
species in the landings and their relative impor-
tance between 1993 and 1998. An estimate of 
6400 tons of invertebrates and fishes has been 
extracted in the GofS during this period. There is 
a high diversity in the landings with more than 
100 species, although ten groups represent more 
than 90% of the total capture. In fact, the Atlantic 
anchovy
 ( Cetengraulis edentulus ) represents 
more than 55 % of total landings. It is a low eco-
nomic value species since it is used as fresh food 
for crocodile farming. No  discards are reported 
for the Gulf. The low value species are sustenance 
for fishermen. 
 
General groups according to local names that in-
clude several species or  genera (García 1999)
 are 
registered in the landings. This is a common 
problem in the Caribbean and constitutes a chal-
lenge to devising possible fishery management 
schemes (Christensen and Mahon 1997). 
Table 2.  Inventory of the fishing economical unit s of the Gulf of Salamanca, taken by 
INPA and INPA-VECEP/UE program (Dec. 1996 - Jan. 1997). Geographical location of 
landing towns is shown in Figure 1.  
Boat type Fishing gear  
 
Landing town 
Wood S yn-
thetic 
Motor Oar and 
Sail 
Gill-
nets 
Fishing 
lines 
Beach 
seines 
Long 
lines 
Tasajera 37   37 10  27  
Pueblo Viejo 95  22 73 22 35   
Cienaga 32 12 20 24 9 6   
Papare 11   11 11    
Don Jaca 8 3 3 8 10  1 7 
Aeropuerto 3   3 2 1  6 
Total 186 15 45 156 64 42 28 13 
Table 3. Ten most captured components by the artisanal fisheries in the Gulf of Salamanca between May 1993 and 
May 1998. Landings recorded by INPA and INPA-VECEP/UE program. 
 
 
Scientific name 
 
Local name 
Common 
name* 
Catch 
(Kg) 
% Total 
Catch 
Accum. 
% Catch 
Cetengraulis edentulus Bocona Atlantic 
anchoveta 
3548046 55.395 55.395 
Sphyraena guachancho, S. picudilla, S. barracuda Picuas Barracudas 484721 7.568 62.963 
Caranx bartholomei, C. crysus, C. ruber Cojinoas Jacks 345567 5.395 68.358 
Caranx hippos, C. latus Jureles Jacks 337145 5.264 73.622 
Scomberomorus brasiliensis, S. regalis Carite Mackerels 309754 4.836 78.458 
Conodon nobilis Coco Barred grunt 290653 4.538 82.996 
Lutjanus spp. (1), R. aurorubens, O. chrysurus, P. 
aquilonaris, L. maximus 
Pargos Snappers 204123 3.187 86.183 
Micropogonias furnieri, Menthicirrhus americanus, 
Menthicirrhus littoralis 
Coroncoros Croakers 157265 2.455 88.638 
Ariopsis bonillae, Arius proops, Bagre marinus, 
Cathorops spixi 
Chivos Sea catfishes 152381 2.379 91.017 
Mugil incilis Lisa Parassi 
mullet 
145025 2.264 93.282 
Others (at least 97 species).   155469 6.718 100.000 
(1) L. synagris, L. griseus, L. cyanopterus, L. analis, L. bucanella, L. vivanus, L. jocu, L. purpureus, L. mahogoni, L. apodu 
* From: Cervigon et al. (1992) 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 145  
Table 4 shows the captures of each of the compo-
nents of the model used in the simulation sepa-
rated by fleet, for the year 1997. The beach seines 
reported the greatest volume of landings because 
they capture almost all the small pelagic fishes 
and an important fraction of the pelagic preda-
tory fishes, the second most abundant group in 
the landings. The higher economic value groups 
were epifauna (spiny lobsters), shrimps and 
snappers/grunts. Using factors derived from 
jobs/catch ratios for each gear, gill nets and long 
lines had the higher importance for employment. 
 
Methods 
 
Ecosim Model Parameters 
 
The dynamic simulation model, Ecosim (Walters 
et al.  1997, 2000), requires some parameters in 
addition to those used for Ecopath. This study as-
sumed default values for all settings of Ecosim ex-
cept for the trophic vulnerabilities. These pa-
rameters measure rates with which prey move be-
tween vulnerable and 
non-vulnerable states to 
their predators. Low 
vulnerability rates imply 
bottom-up and high 
rates top-down control. 
Ecosim predictions are 
sensitive to this set of 
parameters (Walters and 
Christensen 2000). In 
tropical systems, top-
down effects could be 
enhanced by the in-
creased food consump-
tion rates of predators in 
relation with the water 
temperature (Pauly 
1998).  
 
On the other hand, the 
positive impact of detritus and lower trophic lev-
els on other groups in some tropical systems 
(Wolff et al.  1998, Manickhand-Heileman et al.  
1998) suggest bottom-up control in the food web. 
In order to consider both bottom-up and top-
down potential effects, the vulnerability rates 
were derived in relation to the trophic level of 
each group in this study (T. Pitcher pers. comm.). 
The lower vulnerability value included (0.2) was 
assigned to the lower trophic level of the system 
(1 - phytoplankton), and conversely, the higher 
vulnerability (0.8) to the higher trophic level (4 – 
rays/sharks). The remainin g groups were scaled 
between these extreme values. In addition, two 
intermediate control levels assigned for the entire 
ecosystem (0.4 and 0.6) were explored and the 
results of their performance indicators were com-
pared. 
 
Objective Functions 
 
A nonlinear optimization procedure to search for 
Table 4. Landings (t/km 2 in 1997) of the groups included in the Ecopath model used 
for the simulation. Local fishermen provided the landed values. Employment factor is 
proportional to the jobs/catch ratio. 
 
 
Group Name 
 
Beach 
seine 
 
Gill net 
 
Long line
 
Fishing 
line 
 
 
Total 
Landed 
value 
(US$/Ton) 
Epifauna - 0.001 - - 0.001 5514.09 
Shrimps 0.005 - - - 0.005 4848.91 
Small Pelagic fishes 0.690 0.005 - - 0.695 250.00 
Small Demersal fishes - - 0.0002 - 0.0002 200.00 
Large Demersal fishes 0.001 0. 011 0.007 0.003 0.022 3071.79 
Pelagic Predatory fishes 0.081 0.118 0.001 0.073 0.273 2164.85 
Rays/Sharks - - 0.001 - 0.001 1692.71 
Mullets/Catfishes 0.002 0.025 0.009 0.018 0.054 2020.62 
Croakers/Mojarras - 0.01 7 0.004 - 0.021 3153.38 
Porgies/Spadefishes - - 0.001 - 0.001 2821.18 
Triggerfishes/Filefishes - - 0.002 - 0.002 493.71 
Snappers/Grunts 0.003 0.003 0.054 0.047 0.107 3568.80 
Sum 0.782 0.18 0.079 0.141 1.182 - 
Employment factor 1.00 1.50 1.15 0.83   
Table 5. Average annual biomass and landings by group calculated over 20 years of Ecopath with Ecosim simulations 
for each maximising function. The values are relative to the baseline simulation parameters. Vulnerabilities were as-
signed as a function of their trophic level. 
 
Function Net Economic value Ecosyste m structure Social value Compromise 
Group Biomass Catch Biomass Catc h Biomass Catch Biomass Catch 
Epifauna 0.98 2.88 1.00 0.96 0.83 8.94 0.97 3.60 
Shrimps 1.58 1.80 0.99 1.02 1.49 1.24 1.55 1.85 
Small Pelagic fishes 2.16 2.15 0.98 1.00 3.90 0.49 1.95 1.99 
Small Demersal fishes 0.62 0.11 1. 01 1.02 0.93 4.04 0.67 1.31 
Large Demersal fishes 1.91 4.40 0.99 0.97 0.34 2.41 1.44 4.04 
Pelagic Predatory fishes 0.06 0.14  1.03 1.00 0.02 0.07 0.12 0.27 
Rays/Sharks 1.23 2.41 1.00 0. 98 1.62 6.52 1.20 2.25 
Mullets/Catfishes 0.12 0.32 1.03  1.00 0.03 0.19 0.15 0.38 
Croakers/Mojarras 0.38 1.08 1. 00 0.97 0.14 1.36 0.31 1.08 
Porgies/Spadefishes 0.60 0.11 1.00 1.01 1.69 7.33 0.69 1.36 
Triggerfishes/Filefishes 1.85 0.33 0.99 1.00 2.36 10.23 1.82 3.46 
Snappers/Grunts 2.27 3.98 0.98  0.97 2.15 5.59 2.45 3.64 
Total 1.02 1.78 0.99 1.00 1.04 0.94 1.02 1.69 
Page 146, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
fishing policies that maximize a particular policy 
goal for management is included in Ecosim as de-
scribe by Christensen et al. (2000). The objective 
functions maximized during the simulations were 
the employment factor (jobs/catch) for the social 
goal, the fisheries profits for the economic goal 
and the reciprocal of P/B ratio of each group as 
the ecological structure objective. 
 
For the combination of the three functions (com-
promise scenario), equal weighting values (1-1-1) 
for all three objective functions underweight the 
ecological component effect. Economic and social 
components were lowered systematically (until 
0.25) to get a “legitimate” effect, i. e. a nearly eq-
uitable compromise between the social, economic 
and ecological effects in the performance indica-
tors used here (see results).
  
 
Graphical representations of the change of the 
biomasses of the fished groups over the time were 
made up from the outputs of the closed-loop 
simulations routine of Ecosim. This routine is a 
Monte-Carlo simulation that includes random er-
rors associated with stock assessment and regula-
tory process dynamics (Christensen et al. 2000). 
 
Results and Discussion 
 
Average annual biomasses and landings for the 
simulation period and relative to the baseline 
conditions are presented for each management 
strategy in Table 5. Total average biomasses 
changed little during the simulation in all scenar-
ios. Total average catches were highest in eco-
nomic and ‘big compromise’ scenarios.
 
 
Marked changes in the biomass partition of the 
ecosystem com-
ponents resulted 
from the social 
and economic ob-
jective function 
simulation. The 
average annual 
biomass of three 
groups (pelagic 
predatory fishes, 
mullets/catfishes 
Table 6.  Performance indicators calculated over th e simulation period for each maximising 
function. Vulnerabilities were assigned as a function of to their trophic level. 
 
 
Objective Function 
Economic 
Value 
Ecosys-
tem  
stability 
Social 
Value 
The big 
compro-
mise 
Fished groups  below 20% start biomass 4 0 4 0 
Fished groups  above 60% start biomass 7 12 8 9 
Total average biomass (t/km2/y) 64.49 62.80 66.01 64.27 
Total average Landings (t/km2/y) 2.11 1.18 1.12 2.01 
Mean trophic level of the ecosystem (w/o detritus) 2.10 2.07 1.88 2.10 
Mean trophic level of landings 2.96 3.04 3.43 2.97 
Figure 3. Closed loop simulations of the predicted biomass trajectories for the fished groups. Segmented lines 
are boundary levels for analysing risk of exceeding during  runs. For this study the lower and upper limits are de-
fined as 20% and 200% of the initial biomass value respectively. Percentages of the total runs exceeding the upper 
limit (>max) or falling below the lower limit (<min) are indicated.  
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 147  
and croakers/mojarras) fell below 20% of the 
baseline biomass during the social maximizing 
simulation and two groups (pelagic predatory 
fishes and mullets/catfishes) fell below 20% of 
the baseline biomass during the economic maxi-
mizing simulation. In contrast, some groups ex-
perienced increased biomass (small pelagic 
fishes, triggerfishes/filefishes, snappers/grunts) 
in spite of the high fishing pressure (see Table 5). 
This optimistic result suggests that the lower pre-
dation pressure, as consequence of both removing 
predators and competitors, exceed the fishing 
pressure for these groups. Ecological structure 
and compromise scenarios did not generate ex-
treme values in the group’s average biomasses 
during the simulations. Apparently, the ecological 
structure weight settings  applied here tend to 
maintain the baseline biomasses and landings. 
 
The closed loop simulations reinforce the changes 
in the average annual bi omasses described above 
and predict some additional changes in the bio-
mass trajectory of other groups (see Fig. 3).  
 
This is the case of croakers/mojarras and por-
gies/spadefishes during the economic maximizing 
simulation and large demersal fishes during the 
social maximiz-
ing simulation. 
For these 
groups, the in-
corporation of 
the dynamics of 
the stock as-
sessment would 
indicate a 
higher risk of 
falling below 
20% of the ini-
tial biomass 
throughout the 
time of simula-
tion than the 
search procedure re-
sults of the optimiza-
tion method or ‘open 
loop policy analysis’ 
(specially in croak-
ers/mojarras for the 
economic maximizing 
scenario where 100% 
of the runs fell below 
the 20% of the initial 
biomass, see Figure 
3). 
 
Catches of high value 
groups were increased 
in the economic sce-
nario, while in the so-
cial and compromise scenarios catches of several 
groups were increased. 
 
Fishing rates of gill nets and long lines were in-
creased by a factor of 15.9 and five respectively in 
the social objective function simulation. These 
fishing rates were heavily decreased in the other 
simulation scenarios (Tab le 6). Predicted catches 
and economic values were higher in the economic 
scenario. In contrast, the social objective simula-
tion generated the lowest predicted economic 
value (Table 6). 
 
High biomasses and catches that are predicted for 
other high value groups should be regarded with 
caution. The decrease of the total prey mortality 
owing to the elimination of one predator may be 
compensated by increase in the vulnerability to 
other predators due to changes in behavioral or 
physiological states of preys and/or enlargement 
of the time exposed to predators (Christensen and 
Walters 2000).  
 
The results of the analysis presented here show a 
strong social pressure in the system and reinforce 
the urgency of a monitoring plan for the GofS to 
avoid potential Malthusian overfishing (Pauly et 
Table 7 . Performance indicators calculated over th e simulation period for each maximising 
function when vulnerabilities of 0.6 were assign ed to all groups. Predicted fishing rates and eco-
nomical values are relative to the baseline simulation parameters. 
 
 
Objective Function 
Economic 
Value 
Ecosystem 
stability 
Social 
Value 
‘Big com-
promise’ 
Fished groups  below 20% start biomass 5 4 5 5 
Fished groups  above 60% start biomass 7 7 7 7 
Total average biomass (t/km2/y) 71.65 68.56 71.14 70.05 
Total average landings (t/km2/y) 1.39 3.46 1.27 2.75 
Mean trophic level of the ecosystem (- detritus) 2.10 2.08 2.10 2.09 
Mean trophic level of landings 3.63 2.90 3.68 2.96 
Predicted Fishing Rate of Beach Seine 0.1 1 0 1.1 
Predicted Fishing Rate of Gill net 5.2 1.6 6.5 1.8 
Predicted Fishing Rate of Long line 0.5 1.5 4.2 1.8 
Predicted Fishing Rate of Fishing line 4.5 2.2 0 1.9 
Predicted Economic Value 1.52 1.29 0.89 1.04 
Table 8 . Performance indicators calculated over th e simulation period for each maximising 
function when vulnerabilities of 0.4 were assign ed to all groups. Predicted fishing rates and eco-
nomical values are relative to the baseline simulation parameters. 
 
Objective Function 
Economic 
Value 
Ecosystem 
stability 
Social 
Value 
‘big com-
promise’ 
Fished groups  below 20% start biomass 2 0 2 0 
Fished groups  above 60% start biomass 11 13 11 11 
Total average biomass (t/km2/y) 63.62 63.13 61.36 63.31 
Total average Landings (t/km2/y) 2.10 1.42 0.70 1.38 
Mean trophic level of the ecosystem (w/o detritus) 2.08 2.08 1.84 2.08 
Mean trophic level of landings 2.94 2.98 3.52 3.01 
Predicted Fishing Rate of Beach Seine 1.3 0.7 0 1.1 
Predicted Fishing Rate of Gill net 4 1.1 6.8 1.2 
Predicted Fishing Rate of Long line 1.6 0.8 5.3 1.2 
Predicted Fishing Rate of Fishing line 3.6 1.3 0 1.2 
Predicted Economical Value 0.76 0.97 0.77 0.7 
Page 148, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
al. 1989). 
 
This study represents the first exploratory analy-
sis addressing ecosystem management strategies 
for Colombia. Independent information to vali-
date the simulations will be needed. Further stud-
ies, confirmation and refinement of input pa-
rameters will be needed to explore the ecosystem 
responses in more detail. At the end the decision 
about which management strategy is the best to 
apply will always be a political one, but at least we 
hope it will be an informed one.
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We are grateful to Prof. T.J. Pitcher for the invitation to 
attend the FAO/UBC Fisheries Centre Workshop and 
for his hospitality, support and interest. We thank 
Fisheries Centre/University of British Columbia for 
sponsoring the participation in the Workshop. Finan-
cial support for L.O. Duarte is given by a Ph. D. schol-
arship from the Deutscher Akademischer Austauschdi-
enst (DAAD). Research was funded by the Fondo Co-
lombiano de Investigaciones Científicas, 
COLCIENCIAS (Project cod. 2105-09-176-94) and the 
Instituto de Investiaciones Marinas y Costeras, 
INVEMAR. E. Viloria provided some social information 
from the GofS fisheries. 
 
References 
 
Allen, R. 1971. Relation between production and bio-
mass. J. Fish Res. Board Can.28: 1573-1581. 
Arreguin-Sánchez, F., E. Valero-Pacheco and E. A. 
Chávez. 1993. A trophic box model of the coastal 
fish communities of the southwestern Gulf of 
Mexico, Pages 197-205 in: Christensen V. and D. 
Pauly (eds) Trophic Models of Aquatic Ecosys-
tems. ICLARM Conf. Proc. 26: 390 pp. 
Cervigon et al. (ten authors) 1992. Fichas FAO de iden-
tificación de especies para  los fines de pesca. Guía 
de campo de las especies comerciales marinas y de 
agus salobres de la costa septentrional de Sur 
América.CCE. NORAD. FAO. 513 pp. 
Chrisholm,L.A. and J.C.Roff 1990. Abundances, growth 
rates, and production of tropical neritic copepods 
off Kingston, Jamaica. Marine Biology 106: 79-89. 
Christensen, V. and D.Pauly 1992. ECOPATH II - a 
software for balancing steady-state models and 
calculating network characteristics. Ecol. Model-
ling 61:169-185. 
Christensen, V. and R.Maho n 1997. Researchable is-
sues relevant for management of large marine 
ecosystems, with special reference to the Carib-
bean. ACP-EU Fisheries Re search Report (3): 79-
100. 
Christensen, V. and C. Wa lters 2000. Ecopath with 
Ecosim: Methods, Capabilities and Limitations. In 
D. Pauly and T.J. Pitcher (eds) Methods for as-
sessing the impact of fisheries on marine ecosys-
tems of North Atlantic. Fi sheries Centre Research 
Reports 8(2): 195 pp). 
Christensen, V., C.J. Walt ers and D. Pauly 2000. Eco-
path with Ecosim: a User´s Guide, October 2000 
Edition. Fisheries Centre, University of British Co-
lumbia, Vancouver, Canada and ICLARM, Penang, 
Malaysia, 130 pp. 
Duarte, L.O., C.B. García and I. Moreno (con con-
tribución de G. Melo, P. Navajas, N. Sandoval y D. 
Von Schiller) 1999. Atlas demográfico de los peces 
demersales del Golfo de Salamanca, Caribe Co-
lombiano. Dinámica Poblacional, Distribución, 
Alimentación y Reproducción. Digital book CD. 
Invemar - Colciencias. ISBN 95950-6-5. 
García, C.B., L.O. Duarte and D. von Schiller 1998. 
Demersal fish assemblages of the Gulf of Sala-
manca, Colombia (southern Caribbean Sea). Mar. 
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 174: 13-25. 
García, C.B., M. Barros. an d L. Manjarres 1999. De-
scripción de mediano plazo de las pesquerías del 
Golfo de Salamanca: Primera aproximación. Pages 
20-51 in C.B.García (ed. ). Estudio integral del 
Golfo de Salamanca, Cari be Colombiano. Techni-
cal Report to COLCIENCIAS, Volume II. 
García, C.B. and L.O. Duarte In press. Caribbean fishes 
Comsumption/Biomass (Q/B) ratios and Q/B-
predictor variable values. NAGA ICLARM Q. 
García, C.B. 1999. Incorporating ecosystem modelling 
into fisheries research: a case study from Colom-
bia. ACPU-EU Fisheries Research Report 5: 34-35. 
Larkin, P.A. et al.  (ten authors). 1984. Strategies for 
Multispecies Management . Group Report. Pages 
287-301 in: R.M.May (Ed.) Exploitation of Marine 
Communities. Dahlem Konferenzen. Springer-
Verlag. 
Mangel, M. et al. (43 authors) 1996. Principles for the 
conservation of wild living resources. Ecol. Appl. 
6(2): 338-362. 
Manickhand-Heileman, S., F. Arreguín-Sánchez, A. 
Lara Dominguez and L.A. Soto 1998. Energy flow 
and network analysis of Terminos Lagoon, SW of 
Gulf of Mexico. Journal of Fish Biology 53 (Sup-
plement A): 179-197. 
Manjarres, L., J. Infante and A. Rueda 1993. Parámet-
ros biológico-pesqueros del machuelo ( Opistho-
nema oglinum ), el ojo gordo ( Selar cru-
menophthalmus), el pargo rayado ( Lutjanus 
synagris) y el carite ( Scomberomorus brasilien-
sis), con miras a regular sus capturas con redes de 
enmalle. P 63-68 in Proyecto integral de investi-
gaciones y desarrollo de la pesca artesanal 
marítima en el área de Santa Marta. Informe 
técnico final INPA, CIID, UNIMAGDALENA. 
Osorio, D. 1997. Estudio biológico pesquero de Ceten-
graulis edentulus  Cuvier 1820 (Pisces, Clupeifor-
mes) y algunas consideraciones ecológicas. Sector 
costero Isla de Salamanc a, Caribe Colombiano. 
155 p.  
Palomares, M. and D. Pauly 1998. Predicting food con-
sumption of fish populations as functions of mor-
tality, food type, morphometrics, temperature and 
salinity. Mar. Freshwater Res. 49: 447-453. 
Pauly, D. 1998. Tropical fishes: patterns and propensi-
ties. Journal of Fish Biology 53 (Supplement A): 1-
17. 
Pauly, D., G. Silvestre and I.R. Smith 1989. On devel-
opment, fisheries and dyna mite: a brief review of 
tropical fisheries manage ment. Natural Resources 
Modeling  3(3): 307-329. 
Polovina, J.J. 1984. Model of coral reef ecosystems. I 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 149  
the ECOPATH model and its application to French 
Frigate Shoals, NOAA, Honolulu. Adm. Rep. No. 
83-23. 46 pp. 
Sánchez, C., M. Rueda and A. Santos 1998. Dinámica 
poblacional y pesquería de la lisa, Mugil incilis  
Hancock, en la Cienaga Grande de Santa Marta, 
Caribe Colombiano. Rev. Acad. Colomb. Cienc. 
22(85): 507-517. 
Tijaro, R., M. Rueda and A. Santos 1998. Dinámica po-
blacional del chivo mapalé Cathorops spixii en la 
Cienaga Grande de Santa Marta y complejo de Pa-
jarales, Caribe Colombiano. Bol Invest. Mar. Cost. 
27(11): 87-102. 
Walters, C.J., V.Christense n and D.Pauly 1997. Struc-
turing dynamic models of  exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balanc e assessments. Reviews 
in Fish Biology and Fisheries 7: 139-172. 
Walters C.J., J.F Kitchell, V.Christensen and D.Pauly 
2000. Representing density dependent conse-
quences of life history strategies in aquatic ecosys-
tems: Ecosim II. Ecosystems 3: 70-83. 
Walters C.J. and V.Christen sen 2000. Using independ-
ent information on historical stock depletions and 
maximum tolerable fishing mortality rates to pro-
vide bounds for trophic vulnerability parameters 
in Ecosim. (MS). Fisheries Centre, UBC. Vancou-
ver. 9 p. 
Wolff, M., V.Koch, J.Bautista and J.A.Vargas 1998. A 
trophic model of the Golfo de Nicoya, Costa Rica. 
Rev. Biol. Trop. 46. Supl. 6: 63-79. 
 
Page 150, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
Exploratory analysis of possible 
management strategies in Lake  
Victoria fisheries (Kenyan sector) 
using the recent Ecosim  software
 
 
 
Jacques Moreau, and  
Maria Concepcion Villanueva 
INP/ENSAT, Castanet Tolosan, France  
 
Abstract 
 
New developments in Ecosim, which is part of the well 
known Ecopath software have allowed the user to 
evaluate the effects of a range of possible fisheries 
management strategies for the Lake Victoria fisheries.  
The software is also used in this report to explore the 
fisheries and fish community of Lake Victoria.  In par-
ticular, management  strategies are explored aimed at 
achieving specified socio-economic objectives, includ-
ing maximising the economic value of the ecosystem 
and maximising employment by  altering the pattern of 
fishing effort by the fishing fleets comprising the Lake 
Victoria fishery. Further, the same approach was used 
to consider optimal management strategies from an 
ecological perspective.  
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Lake Victoria, East Africa has undergone dra-
matic changes in the structure of its ecosystem 
since the introduction of Nile perch, Lates niloti-
cus (L.) more than thirty years ago (Wandera & 
Wanink, 1995).  The initial multispecies stock of 
the lake has been replaced by three commercially 
important species: two totally demersal exotics, 
the Nile perch and Nile tilapia, Oreochromis 
niloticus  (L.), and the native sardinelike, 
zooplanktivorous, pelagic cyprinid dagaa, 
Rastrineobola argentea (Pellegrin) (Bundy & 
Pitcher, 1995; Wilson et al. , 1997).  The vast ex-
pansion of fish production  in the lake associated 
with this shift has been due to the increased 
population of Nile perch at the end of the 1970s, 
at the expense of heavy predation on endemic 
species, resulting in the decimation of many hap-
lochromid species (Reynolds and Greboval, 1995; 
Wilson et al, 1997).  The small cyprinid R. ar-
gentea is the only indigenous species of commer-
cial economic importance remaining and became 
the major prey species of the Nile perch  (Ogari & 
Dadzie, 1988).    
 
This present paper is the follow-up of a previous 
contribution (Villanueva & Moreau 2000) in 
which ECOPATH was used in order to describe 
the trophic relationships occurring in the well 
documented and intensively exploited Kenyan 
sector of the lake since the middle of the eighties. 
In this updated work it was possible to estimate 
the biomass, food consumption, trophic level and 
other parameters of the ecosystem, as well as to 
simulate with Ecosim the variations of both the 
biomass and actual catch from 1985-86 to 1995-
96. This study also confirmed most of the ecologi-
cal trends observed in the field and reported by 
several authors (Pitcher & Bundy, 1995; Mkumbo 
et al., 2000). 
 
Methods  
 
The Ecopath IV/Ecosim Software 
 
To model the structure of trophic interactions oc-
curring in the ecosystem, we used ECOPATH IV 
(Christensen and Pauly, 1992, 1993, and 1996 ; 
Walters et al., 1997).  The file which has been util-
ized is the one already documented in Villanueva 
and Moreau (2000). The current  version of  the 
software  allows:  
 
the simulations of the variations in catch and biomass 
related to changes in fishin g effort over time, a rou-
tine which is already known by several users of Eco-
path and was used by Villanueva and Moreau 
(2000); 
the fitting of time series data of biomasses;  
the evaluation of the vulnerability coefficients of each 
group ;  
the fishing policy search options discussed Walters et 
al. (this volume). 
 
 
Designing the present  
Ecopath/Ecosim database  
 
The taxonimic groups considered here are those 
already identified in the previous contributions by 
Moreau et al. (1993) and Villanueva and Moreau 
(2000). The Nile perch L. niloticus was divided 
into separate adult and juvenile components to 
reflect differences in thei r specific P/B, Q/B and 
feeding habits. The necessary inputs for each 
group (P/B, Q/B, EE and the diet composition) 
have been documented in Villanueva and Moreau 
(2000). 
 
The segregation of Lates niloticus group into ju-
veniles and adults led to the division of the fish 
yield according to the fishing gears used, as  
documented by Wanink et al.  (1999), Tweedle 
and Cowx (1999) and Njiru et al. (2000).  In addi-
tion, reasonable economical data (personal com-
munications from resident scientists in the ripar-
ian countries of the lake) have also been incorpo-
rated in the  database: the selling prices of the ex-
ploited fish populations and the relative costs of 
the fishing operation with the fishing gears under 
utilization (see Table 1a and 1b).  
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 151  
Results 
 
Table 2 shows the key fea-
tures of the present Eco-
path IV model and Table 
3 summarizes the diet 
composition of the groups 
considered. 
 
The search for an opti-
mum strategy   (the open 
loop strategy simulation) 
 
This research involved the 
choice of  relative weights 
reflecting the values at-
tached to: the absolute fi-
nancial value of the eco-
system ; the social value 
(as reflected by total em-
ployment across all fisher-
ies) ; and the stability and 
sustainability of the eco-
system as defined by the 
user (see Cochrane, this 
volume).  This paper dif-
fers from the others in 
that it did not explore the 
default strategies (maxi-
mising each of economic, 
social and ecosystem 
goals separately and the 
‘big compromise’ in which 
equal weight was given to  
Table 2.   Key features of the Ecopath model  of the Kenyan sector of Lake Victoria, Africa for 1985-86.  The trophic 
levels, food consumption flow to detritus, and the biomass for all groups (except aquatic birds) have been computed by 
the model.  The input (P/B, Q/B and EE) are documented in Villanueva and Moreau (2000). 
 
 
 
Group name 
Trophic 
level 
Habitat 
area 
Biomass in habi-
tat area  
(t/km2) 
Biomass  
 
(t/km2) 
Prod./ 
biom. 
(year) 
Cons./ biom. 
(/year) 
Ecotrophic 
efficiency 
Prod. / 
cons. 
Fish eat. Birds 3.9 1 0.005 0.005 0.3 60 0 0.005 
Adult Lates n. 3.6 1 10.526 10.526 1 5 0.95 0.2 
Juvenile Lates 3.3 1 5.421 5.421 3.5 11.8 0.98 0.297 
Bagrus/Clarias 3.2 1 1.637 1.637 0.9 6.5 0.95 0.138 
Protopterus 3.2 1 1.532 1. 532 0.3 4.3 0.95 0.07 
Morm./Synodont 3.1 1 0.425 0.425 1 11.5 0.95 0.087 
Haplochr.Predat 3.7 1 0.126 0.126 2.5 8.5 0.95 0.294 
Haplochr.Phytop 2.1 1 0.21 4 0.214 3 41 0.95 0.073 
Haplochr.Bentho 3 1 0.402 0.402 3 21 0.95 0.143 
R.argentea 2.8 1 8.693 8.693 2.8 27 0.95 0.104 
O.niloticus 2.1 1 12.019 12.019 0.95 24.6 0.95 0.039 
Other Tilapias 2.1 1 1.146 1.146 1.2 32 0.95 0.038 
Zooplankton 2 1 11.321 11.321 33.5 140 0.8 0.239 
Lake prawn 2.3 1 5.562 5.562 16 64 0.95 0.25 
Insects/Mollusc 2.1 1 24.879 24.879 5 25 0.8 0.2 
Phytoplankton 1 1 5.327 5.327 365 - 0.95 - 
Bent. Producers 1 1 13.99 13.99 25 - 0.95 - 
Detritus 1 1 10 10 - - 0.652 - 
Table 1.  a)  Landings from the Kenyan sector of Lake Victoria, East Africa (adapted 
from Mkumbo et al. 2000).  Note that landings have  been segregated among various 
current fishing gears for a proper utilization of Ecosim. 
 
 
 
Group \ Catch 
Lates 
long 
lines 
Large 
mesh 
sizes 
Small 
mesh 
sizes 
Dagaa 
fisheries 
Littoral 
lines 
Total 
catch 
Adult Lates n. 5 5    10 
Juvenile Lates  1 2   3 
Bagrus/Clarias     0.15 0.15 
Protopterus     0.03 0.03 
Morm./Synodont     0.03 0.03 
Haplochr.Predat   0.01   0.01 
Haplochr.Phytop   0.01   0.01 
Haplochr.Bentho   0.02   0.02 
R.argentea    6.4  6.4 
O.niloticus  0.6 1   1.6 
Other Tilapias   0.35   0.35 
Total catch 5 6.6 3.39 6.4 0.21 21.6 
Trophic level 3.61 3.42  2.8 2.83 3.19 3.19 
 
 
b) The value, costs and profit by gear type for the Lake Victoria fishery in Kenya. The 
selling prices of the fish have been set as fo llows:  2 US$ kg for nile perch, 0.5 US$ for 
haplochromids and native tilapia, and 1 US$ per kilo for other groups including Nile 
tilapia. 
Adult Lates n. 10 10    20 
Juvenile Lates  2 4   6 
Bagrus/Clarias     0.15 0.15 
Protopterus     0.03 0.03 
Morm./Synodont     0.03 0.03 
Haplochr.Predat   0.01   0.01 
Haplochr.Phytop   0.01   0.01 
Haplochr.Bentho   0.01   0.01 
R.argentea    6.4  6.4 
O.niloticus  0.6 1   1.6 
Other Tilapias   0.18   0.18 
Total value 10 12.6 5.2 6.4 0.21 34.41 
Page 152, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
all three considerations) but instead considered 
five different scenarios wh ich were all in general 
agreement with the current situation and concern 
of the Lake Victoria Fisheries Organization 
(M.Ntiba, pers. comm. to J.M.).  
 
The settings for the two primary simulations are 
shown in Table 4 above. For the reasons dis-
cussed in the chapter by Cochrane (this volume), 
the weighting of 0.8 for ecological balance would 
probably have resulted in this consideration being 
largely over-ridden by the economic and social 
criteria. Therefore the primary differences in 
these two were the different weightings given to 
social value, and the values of jobs per unit of 
catch for each fishery. Running the open loop 
search routine with thes e two scenarios resulted 
in the following estimated fishing effort multipli-
ers to achive the goals as specified by the weight-
ings assigned to economic and social value and 
ecosystem stability. Results are expressed as mul-
tipliers of existing fishing mortality (e.g. to attain 
the goals reflected in Scenario 1, the effort in the 
Lates long line fishery would need to be increased 
to an estimated 2.8 times of the present effort 
level). 
           Scenario 1  Scenario 2 
Lates long lines  2.8      3.1 
Large mesh sizes  2.4      2.3 
Small mesh sizes  0.8      0.8 
Dagaa fisheries       1.8       1.5 
Littoral lines  1.2       1.4 
 
These conclusions are consistent with what has 
been suggested and discussed with colleagues in-
volved in Lake Victoria fisheries management 
(see various contributions in Cowx, 2001). 
 
A third scenario was also examined, similar eco-
nomic and social weightings as in Scenario 1 (Ta-
ble 4), but with the additional goal of attempting 
to rebuild the populations of haplochromid spe-
cies. The estimated pattern of fishing effort to 
achieve this goal was : 
 
Lates longlines 0.09  
Large meshsizes  1.83  
Small mesh sizes   1.23  
Dagaa fisheries   0.33  
Littoral lines    0.61  
 
This strategy would involve shutting down the 
fishery for Lates, and it is not clear how this 
would contribute to re build the haplochromid 
population. This requires further exploration. 
 
In the fourth scenario we gave the same input as 
in Scenario 1 for economic and social value, but 
set a default target biomass of 0 for all species 
with the exception of economically important 
species (0.2) and haplochromids (0.5). 
 
Table 3.  Diet composition of the various groups for ECOPATH in Lake Victoria, Africa, as documented in  Villanueva 
and Moreau (2000). 
 
 Prey \ Predator 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 
1  F i s h  e a t .  B i r d s                 
2  A d u l t  L a t e s  n .                 
3 Juvenile Lates  0.25 0.03 0.04 0.01 0.005          
4 Bagrus/Clarias  0.02  0.01 0.01 0.005          
5 Protopterus  0.005  0.005 0.01 0.005          
6 Morm./Synodont  0.005  0.005 0.005 0.005          
7 Haplochr.Predat 0.15 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.05         
8 Haplochr.Phytop 0.15 0.003 0.004 0.002 0.001 0.001 0.1         
9 Haplochr.Bentho 0.2 0.005 0.01 0.002 0.003 0.003 0.1         
10 R.argentea 0.5 0.15 0.1 0.1 0.05 0.05 0.6         
11 O.niloticus  0.1 0.05 0.04 0.025 0.04          
12 Other Tilapias  0.01 0.005 0.005 0.005 0.005          
13 Zooplankton   0.05 0.03 0.03 0.05 0.05 0.03 0.05 0.7 0.02 0.02 0.02 0.2 0.04 
14 Lake prawn  0.4 0.5 0.2 0.15 0.05 0.05  0.15 0.05 0.03    0.01 
15 Insects/Mollusc  0.05 0.25 0.5 0.65 0.7 0.05 0. 02 0.7 0.05  0.03  0.05 0.05 
16 Phytoplankton        0.5  0.2 0.7 0.45 0.95 0.1 0.05 
17 Bent. Producers    0.01  0.02  0.25 0.05  0.1 0.3  0.2 0.35 
18 Detritus    0.05 0.05 0.05  0.2 0. 05  0.15 0.2 0.03 0.45 0.5 
19 Import      0.01          
Table 4 : Summary of the specifications defining the 
fishing policies considered for the Kenyan sector of  
Lake Victoria. Time period for each simulation : 15 years 
 
a)  Weights assigned Scenario 1 Scenario 2 
Total economic value             1 1 
Social value (job opportu-
nities)     
0.5 1 
Ecosystem stability                0.8 0.8 
 
(b) Relative no. of jobs per unit mass of catch.   
Lates long line  21.5  
Large mesh nets   21.5  
Small mesh nets    1 0.5 
Dagaa fisheries     2 1.5 
Littoral lines       0.5 0.5 
 
(c ) Relative weightings assigned to different species 
Default value 1  
Nile perch, dagaa and Nile 
tilapias 
1.2  
Haplochromines 1.5  
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 153  
The estimated fishing effort multipliers to achieve 
this goal were : 
 
Lates longlines   0.29 
Large meshsizes  2.83  
Small mesh sizes  9.98 
Dagaa fisheries  0.004  
Littoral lines  0.29 
 
This represents a particularly large increase in the 
small mesh fishery which would increase fishing 
mortality on juveniles and Nile tilapias.  
 
Finally, the fifth scenario maintained the Scenario 
1 parameters but increased the social value to 1 
instead of 0.5 and set the default target biomass 
as 1, with the exception of  the haplochromids (2) 
and selected important species (1.5).  
  
Lates longlines  1.06 
Large meshsizes  1.60 
Small mesh sizes  1.5  
Dagaa fisheries  0.  
Littoral lines  0.98 
 
The closed loop strategy simulation 
 
The closed loop strategy simulation examines the 
impact of observation and implementation uncer-
tainty on the performance of the management 
strategy. In our example, a clear oscillation pat-
tern is displayed for most of the groups situated 
at the highest trophic levels, meaning that the 
strong predator/prey rela tionship between adult 
and juvenile nile perch had indirect impacts on 
other components of the ecosystem.  
 
Discussion  
 
The open loop simulations suggested that a re-
covery of haplochromids could be stimulated by 
an appropriate fishing startegy. 
 
The possible reasons for the oscillating and yet 
opposite behavior in the biomass trends and 
catch values of adult and the juvenile Lates under 
the closed loop simulations need to be investi-
gated in detail. According to Walters et al. (1997) 
an increased density of adult Lates would first 
lead to a decrease of juvenile biomass simply by 
predation whereas, at a later stage, it would lead 
to a decrease in densit y of other predators and 
competitors. This would result in improving feed-
ing conditions and a simultaneous decrease on 
the predation pressure for these juveniles. This 
could lead to the observed oscillatory behaviour. 
 Clearly the evolution of the ecosystem of Lake 
Victoria has been controlled by a top-down pat-
tern during the early years of increasing impor-
tance of Nile Perch in the actual catch. The cur-
rent situation may differ from the early period 
due to changes in the water quality (eutrophica-
tion, depletion of oxygen in the deep layers).  An 
alternative hypothesis is the lower trophic levels 
are driven largely by  bottom-up effects, whereas 
a top-down effect is controlling the dynamics of 
the higher trophic levels (D. Pauly, pers.comm.).  
 
The scenarios for implementing an open loop 
search for the optimum fisheries strategy rely on 
specified values to be specified of the total eco-
nomical value of the fishery, its value in terms of 
total employment, and of the ecological goals. The 
social value requires specification of the relative 
employment value of each fishing gear, while the 
ecological goals require an indication of the target 
biomass for each functional group in the ecosys-
tem.  It should be noted that when this study was 
done, little was known by the authors on these 
values or on the ecological targets that would be 
preferred by the different interest groups in the 
fishery. Hence the figures and choices shown here 
should be regarded as tentative only.   
 
Conclusion 
 
Although it provides very useful features for 
simulating the trajectory of catch and biomass 
over time, Ecosim has some limits in its predic-
tive power. In particular, it would be useful to be 
able to include the impact of changes in water 
quality, especially in terms of variations in pri-
mary production. This could be explored further 
using the forcing functions of Ecosim, which 
opens up a large field for further investigation.  
 
Acknowledgements  
 
The authors are extremely grateful to the participants 
of the FAO/UBC Fisheries Center Ecopath Workshop 
for fruitful discussions. The assistance and advice of 
Villy Christensen and Carl Walters have also to be 
gratefully acknowledged.  
 
References 
 
Bundy  A. and Pitcher, T.J.  (1995)  An analysis of spe-
cies changes in Lake Victoria: did the Nile perch act 
alone? Pages 111-135 in Pitcher,T.J. and Hart,P.J.B. 
(eds) The Impact of Spec ies Changes in African 
Lakes. Chapman and Hall, London. 601pp. 
C h r i s t e n s e n  V .  a n d  P a u l y ,  D .   ( 1 9 9 2 )    E C O P A T H  I I  a  
software for balancing st eady state ecosystem mod-
els and calculating network characteristics. Ecologi-
cal Modelling 61: 169-185. 
C h r i s t e n s e n  V .  a n d   P a u l y ,  D .  ( e d s )   ( 1 9 9 3 )   T r o p h i c  
Models of Aquatic Ecosystems.:ICLARM Manila, 
Philippines. ICLARM Conference Proceedings, 26: 
390 pp. 
Christensen V. and Pauly, D. (1996)  Ecological Model-
ling for All. NAGA, The ICLARM Quarterly 19 (2), 
25-26. 
 Cowx I. G.(ed.). 2000. Proceedings of the International 
Page 154, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
Symposium & Workshop on Management and 
Ecology of Lake and Reserv oir Fisheries, University 
of Hull, England.  10-14 April 2000. in press. 
Mkumbo O. C., Okaranon J., Getabu A., Muhoozi L.,  
Othina A., Cowx I.G. an d Tweddle, D. (2000)  
Analysis of exploitation patterns for Nile perch in 
Lake Victoria. In Cowx, I. G.(ed.) Proceedings of the 
International. Symposium & Workshop on Man-
agement and Ecology of Lake and Reservoir Fisher-
ies, University of Hull, UK. in press. 
Moreau J., Ligtvoet, W. and  Palomares, M.L.D. (1993) 
Trophic relationships in the fish community of Lake 
Victoria, Kenya, with emphasis on the impact of 
Nile perch ( Lates niloticus ). P144-152 In Christen-
sen, V. and  Pauly, D. (eds.) 1993 op. cit. 
Villanueva M.C. and J. Moreau (2000) Recent trends of 
evolution in Lake Victoria fisheries as assessed by 
Ecopath 4 (with Ecosim) software. In I. Cowx (Ed.)  
Lake and Reservoirs Fisheries  Management. Publ. 
The University of Hull. UK.  
Njiru M., Othina N. and Cowx , I.G. (2000)  Lake Victo-
ria invasion by water hyacinth a blessing for Lake 
V i c t o r i a  f i s h e r i e s .  I n  C o w x  I .  G .  ( e d . ) ,  P r o c e e d i n g s  
of the International. Symposium & Workshop on 
Management and Ecology of Lake and Reservoir 
Fisheries, University of Hu ll, England.  10-14 April 
2000. in  press. 
Ogari, J. and S. Dadzie 1988. The food of the Nile 
perch, Lates niloticus  (L.), after the disappearance 
of the haplochromine cichlids in the Nyanza Gulf of 
Lake Victoria (Kenya). J. Fish Biol. 32: 571-577.  
P i t c h e r ,  T . J .  a n d  B u n d y ,  A .  ( 1 9 9 5 )  A s s e s s m e n t  o f  t h e  
Nile perch fishery in Lake Victoria.Pages 163-180 in 
Pitcher,T.J. and Hart,P.J.B. (eds) The Impact of 
Species Changes in African Lakes. Chapman and 
Hall, London. 601pp. 
Reynolds, J. E. and Greboval, D.F. (1995) Socio-
economic effects of the evolution of Nile perch fish-
eries in Lake Victoria: a re view.  F.A.O. CIFA Tech-
nical  Papers  17, 148 pp.  
Tweddle, D. and Cowx, I.G. (eds.) (1999) Lake Victoria 
Fisheries Research Project – Phase II. Proceedings 
of the International Workshop held at the Triangle 
Hotel, Jinja, Africa. 29 March to 1 April 1999. 
Walters C., Christensen V. and Pauly, D. (1997)  Struc-
turing dynamic models of exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass balanced assessments.  Reviews 
in Fish Biology and Fisheries 7: 139-172. 
Wandera S. B. and Wanink, J.H. (1995)  Growth and 
Mortality of Dagaa ( Rastrineobola argentea , Fam. 
Cyprinidae) in Lake Vict oria.  NAGA, The ICLARM 
Quarterly 18  (1): 42-45. 
W a n i n k  J .  H . ,  G o o d s w a a r d   P . C .  a n d  B e r g e r ,  M . R .  
(1999)  Rastrineobola argentea , a major resource 
in the ecosystem of Lake Victoria. Pages 295-309  in  
v a n  D e n s e n  W .  L .  T .  a n d   M o r r i s  M .  J .  ( e d s )  F i s h  
and Fisheries of lakes and reservoirs in Southeast 
Asia and Africa. 432 pp.  
Wilson D. C., Medard M. , Harris C.K., and  Wiley, D.S. 
(1996)  Potentials for comanagement of the Nile 
Perch Fishery-Lake Victoria, Tanzania.  Proc. of the 
Voices from the Common Conference of the Inter-
national Association for the study of common prop-
erty, Berkeley CA. 5-8 June 1996.
  
 
FAO/Fisheries Centre Workshop, Page 155  
Names and Addresses of  
Workshop Attendees 
 
Jackie Alder 
Edith Cowan University, Joondalup  
Western Australia 
j.alder@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Francisco Arreguín-Sánchez  
Centro Interdisciplinario de Ciencias del Mar  
Playa El Conchalito s/n.  
La Paz  Apdo. Postal 592  
Baja California Sur  
Mexico 23000 
farregui@ipn.mx 
 
Kerim Aydin 
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences  
University of Washington 
Seattle 
USA 
kerim@fish.washington.edu 
 
Alasdair Beattie 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver 
Canada V6T 1Z4 
a.beattie@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Eny Anggraini Buchary  
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver  
Canada V6T 1Z4 
e.buchary@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Alida Bundy 
Bedford Institute of Oceanography 
PO Box 1006,  
Darmouth  N.S.  B2Y 4A2 
Canada 
BundyA@mar.dfo-mpo.gc.ca 
 
Luis E. Calderón-Aguilera
 
Centro de Investigación Científica y de Educación  
       Superior de Ensenada.  
Km 107 carretera Tijuana – Ensenada,  
Ensenada,  
Baja California,  
Mexico 22800 
 
Wai-Lung Cheung 
Department of Ecology and Biodiversity  
The University of Hong Kong  
PokFuLam Road 
Hong Kong 
wcheung@wwf.org.hk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Villy Christensen 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia  
Vancouver  
Canada V6T 1Z4 
v.christensen@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Kevern Cochrane 
FAO 
Rome  
Italy 
Kevern.Cochrane@fao.org 
 
Luis Orlando Duarte 
Department of Oceanography 
University of Concepción  
Casilla (P.O. Box) 160-C  
Concepción,  
Chile 
lduarte@udec.cl
 
 
Villarino Fernanda 
Instituto Nacional de  
            Investigación y Desarrollo Pesquero.  
Paseo Victoria Ocampo N* 1. (7600)  
Mar del Plata 
Argentina 
mlasta@inidep.edu.ar 
 
Katia Friere 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia  
Vancouver 
Canada V6T 1Z4 
k.friere@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Beth Fulton 
CSIRO  
Hobart 
Australia 
beth.fulton@marine.csiro.au 
 
Camilo B. García 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia /  
Instituto de Investigaciones Marinas y Costeras  
A.A. 1016 Santa Marta 
Colombia 
 
Sylvie Guénette 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall 
University of British Columbia   
Vancouver 
Canada  V6T 1Z4 
s.guenette@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 156, Using Ecosim for Fisheries Management 
Johanna Heymans 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia  
Vancouver 
Canada V6T 1Z4 
j.heymans@ fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Subhat Nurhakim 
Research Institute for Marine Fisheries  
Ministry of Agriculture of the Republic of Indonesia 
Jakarta 
Indonesia 
kanlutmb@indosat.net.id 
 
Edward Nsiku 
109-7341 19
th Avenue  
Burnaby  BC  
Canada  V3N 1E3 
emnsiku@aol.com. 
 
Steve Martell 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver 
Canada  V6T 1Z4 
s.martell@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Steve Mackinson 
CEFAS  
Lowestoft   
United Kingdom 
s.mackinson@cefas.co.uk 
 
Jacques Moreau 
Department of Inland Fisheries - I.N.P./E.N.S.A.T. 
B.P. 107 Auzeville Tolosane  
31 326 Castanet 
Tolosan  
France   
ching@flora.ensat.fr and  
moreau@ensat.fr  
 
Thomas A. Okey 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall 
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver 
Canada  V6T 1Z4 
t.okey@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Tony Pitcher
 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia   
Vancouver 
Canada  V6T 1Z4 
t.pitcher@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Lynne J Shannon 
Marine and Coastal Management 
Private bag X2   
Rogge Bay  8012 
South Africa 
lshannon@mcm.wcape.gov.za 
Tony Smith 
CSIRO   
Hobart   
Australia 
Tony.Smith@marine.csiro.au 
 
Carl Walters 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver  
Canada  V6T 1Z4 
c.walters@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Tonny Wagey 
Dept. of Earth and Ocean Sciences  
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver  
Canada 
twagey@eos.ubc.ca 
 
Marcelo Vasconcellos
 
Fisheries Centre 
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver 
Canada  V6T 1Z4
 
m.vasconcellos@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Reg Watson 
Fisheries Centre  
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver  
Canada  V6T 1Z4 
r.watson@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
Dirk Zeller 
Fisheries Centre  
2204 Main Mall  
University of British Columbia 
Vancouver  
Canada  V6T 1Z4 
d.zeller@fisheries.ubc.ca 
 
 
 