fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 1
ORIGINAL RESEARCH
published: 08 December 2020
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2020.578717
Edited by:
Alida Bundy,
Bedford Institute of Oceanography
(BIO), Canada
Reviewed by:
Júlio Neves De Araújo,
Agência Paulista de Tecnologia dos
Agronegócios (APTA), Brazil
Samuel Shephard,
Inland Fisheries Ireland, Ireland
*Correspondence:
Pierre-Yves Hernvann
pierre.yves.hernvann@gmail.com
Specialty section:
This article was submitted to
Marine Fisheries, Aquaculture
and Living Resources,
a section of the journal
Frontiers in Marine Science
Received: 01 July 2020
Accepted: 03 November 2020
Published: 08 December 2020
Citation:
Hernvann P-Y, Gascuel D,
Grüss A, Druon J-N, Kopp D, Perez I,
Piroddi C and Robert M (2020) The
Celtic Sea Through Time and Space:
Ecosystem Modeling to Unravel
Fishing and Climate Change Impacts
on Food-Web Structure
and Dynamics.
Front. Mar. Sci. 7:578717.
doi: 10.3389/fmars.2020.578717
The Celtic Sea Through Time and
Space: Ecosystem Modeling to
Unravel Fishing and Climate Change
Impacts on Food-Web Structure and
Dynamics
Pierre-Yves Hernvann 1,2*, Didier Gascuel 2, Arnaud Grüss 3,4, Jean-Noël Druon 5,
Dorothée Kopp 1, Ilan Perez 2,6, Chiara Piroddi 5 and Marianne Robert 1
1 Ifremer, STH, Lorient, France, 2 ESE, Ecology and Ecosystem Health, Institut Agro, INRAE, Rennes, France, 3 National
Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research, Evans Bay Parade, Greta Point, Wellington, New Zealand, 4 School of Aquatic
and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States, 5 European Commission, Joint Research Centre
(JRC), Ispra, Italy, 6 MARBEC, Univ. Montpellier, CNRS, Ifremer, IRD, Sète, France
Both trophic structure and biomass ﬂow within marine food webs are inﬂuenced
by the abiotic environment and anthropogenic stressors such as ﬁshing. The abiotic
environment has a large effect on species spatial distribution patterns and productivity
and, consequently, spatial co-occurrence between predators and prey, while ﬁshing
alters species abundances and food-web structure. In order to disentangle the impacts
of the abiotic environment and ﬁshing in the Celtic Sea ecosystem, we developed a
spatio-temporal trophic model, speciﬁcally an Ecopath with Ecosim with Ecospace
model, for the period 1985–2016. In this model, particular attention was paid to the
parameterization of the responses of all trophic levels to abiotic environmental changes.
Satellite remote sensing data were employed to determine the spatial distribution and
annual ﬂuctuations of primary production (PP). Spatial and temporal changes in the
habitat favorable for zooplankton were predicted with a novel ecological-niche approach
using daily detection of productivity fronts from satellite ocean color. Finally, functional
responses characterizing the effect of several abiotic environmental variables (including,
among others, temperature, salinity and dissolved oxygen concentration, both at the
surface and at the bottom) on ﬁsh species groups’ habitat suitability were produced from
the predictions of statistical habitat models ﬁtted to presence-absence data collected by
multiple ﬁsheries-independent surveys. The dynamic component of our model (Ecosim)
was driven by time-series of ﬁshing effort, PP , zooplankton habitat suitability and abiotic
environmental variables, and was ﬁtted to abundance and ﬁsheries catch data. The
spatial component of our model (Ecospace) was constructed, for speciﬁc years of
the period 1985–2016 with contrasted abiotic environmental conditions, to predict the
variable distribution of the biomass of all functional groups. We found that ﬁshing was
the main driver of observed ecosystem changes in the Celtic Sea over the period 1985–
2016. However, the integration of the environmental variability into the model and the
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 1 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 2
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
subsequent improvement of the ﬁt of the dynamic Ecosim component highlighted (i) the
control of the overall pelagic production by PP and (ii) the inﬂuence of temperature on
the productivity of several trophic levels in the Celtic Sea, especially on trophic groups
with warm and cold water afﬁnities. In addition, Ecospace predictions indicated that the
spatial distributions of commercial ﬁsh species may have substantially changed over the
studied period. These spatial changes mainly appeared to be driven by temperature and
may, therefore, largely impact future ﬁsheries given the continuity of climatic changes.
Keywords: Celtic Sea, ecosystem modeling, habitat model, environment, Ecopath with Ecosim and Ecospace,
primary production, ﬁshing impact
INTRODUCTION
Food webs govern the structure and functioning of marine
ecosystems (Libralato et al., 2014) and are, therefore, typically
modeled using trophodynamic models. However, marine
ecosystems are far from being spatially homogeneous and the
productivity of species at the base of the trophic network and
prey-predator interactions can vary largely over space (Polis
et al., 1997). This spatial variability determines the characteristics
of food webs, including their stability and persistence (Huxel and
McCann, 1998; Melian and Bascompte, 2002; Gravel et al., 2011).
The main driver of the spatial heterogeneity in prey-
predator interactions in marine ecosystems is the abiotic
environment (hereafter simply referred to as the “environment”).
Environmental variables such as salinity, temperature and
chlorophyll-a govern species distributions by deﬁning their
“environmental niche” (Hutchinson, 1957; Chase and Leibold,
2003). Hence, by regulating the degree of overlap between
species niches, the environment largely inﬂuences species
interactions and shapes communities and food-web structure
along gradients (Pellissier et al., 2013; Kortsch et al., 2019).
In addition, topography and the structural habitat play an
essential role in the spatial variability of marine food webs. In
particular, water depth greatly inﬂuences exchanges between the
pelagic and benthic compartments of ecosystems through food
accessibility (Giraldo et al., 2017; Agnetta et al., 2019). Seabed
features (including substrate composition) and water column
characteristics also mediate species interactions within marine
ecosystems by inﬂuencing the accessibility of potential prey items
to predators (Gardner, 1981), by providing refugia to the prey
(e.g., Menge and Lubchenco, 1981) or by facilitating predation
through aggregation (Le Fèvre, 1987).
The complexity of marine food webs is enhanced by the
responses of predators to their prey, and by competition
(Hunsicker et al., 2011). The feeding rate of any predator on
a given prey depends on the abundance of that prey (Holling,
1959) and the relative preference of the predator for other co-
occurring prey items (Murdoch, 1969). The spatial distribution of
a predator can be substantially aﬀected by the spatial distribution
of its potential prey (Logerwell and Hargreaves, 1996; Torres
et al., 2008), and vice versa (Barnett and Semmens, 2012), as well
as by the spatial distribution of the other predators that compete
for those prey (Hansson, 1984; Ward et al., 2001). Therefore,
identifying the relative role of the drivers of the structure and
functioning of marine ecosystems and their changes requires
spatially-explicit ecosystem models where the spatial patterns
of species biomass depend on both a speciﬁc environment and
trophic interactions.
Spatially-explicit ecosystem models such as Atlantis (Fulton
et al., 2004; Audzijonyte et al., 2019), OSMOSE (Shin and
Cury, 2001) and Ecopath with Ecosim and Ecospace (Pauly
et al., 2000; Christensen et al., 2014) simulate food-web
functioning while representing the spatial distribution patterns
of all ecosystem components. These spatially-explicit ecosystem
models are powerful tools to disentangle the intricate eﬀects
of trophic relationships, the environment and anthropogenic
stressors, e.g., ﬁshing, on species distribution patterns and
biomass ﬂows within marine ecosystems. In the context of
climate change, spatially-explicit food-web models that integrate
predictions from statistical habitat or niche modeling approaches
are particularly useful to predict how ecosystems may respond
to future modiﬁcations in environmental conditions (Pellissier
et al., 2013; Moullec et al., 2019a). However, such spatial food-
web models are currently relatively scarce and these models
have often diﬃculty to comprehensively represent heterogeneous
spatial processes.
The Celtic Sea represents a large portion of the Western
European continental shelf, and extends from the Western
English Channel to the Celtic break delimiting Porcupine Sea
Bight and the South-West of Ireland ( Figure 1). This ecosystem
has a complex spatial organization since it encompasses a broad
range of depths and a diversity of substrate types, resulting in a
variety of benthic habitats that host a wide diversity of species
assemblages (Le Danois, 1948; Ellis et al., 2013, 2002; Martinez
et al., 2013). This diversity of species assemblages is conducive to
complex trophic interactions (Trenkel et al., 2005). In addition,
the Celtic Sea is located at the interface of the Lusitanian and
Boreal provinces, therefore deﬁning the northern or southern
limit of the distribution range of many species (Dinter, 2001).
The presence of pelagic mesoscale structures such as productivity
fronts (Pingree, 1980; Pingree et al., 1982) is another source
of spatial heterogeneity in the Celtic Sea ecosystem. Ultimately,
spatial heterogeneity in Celtic Sea ﬁsh communities is reﬂected
by the highly mixed ﬁsheries that operate in the Celtic Sea region
(Sharples et al., 2013; Mateo et al., 2017; Dolder et al., 2018;
Moore et al., 2019). Fishing has been identiﬁed as the primary
driver of changes in the Celtic Sea ecosystem since 1950 and this
pressure has culminated in the late 1990s (Gascuel et al., 2016;
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 2 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 3
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 1 | General location of the Celtic Sea (top left corner) and delimitation of the study area regarding physical and management boundaries. The Celtic Sea is
located at the border between Lusitanian and Boreal provinces. The Celtic Sea EwE and Ecospace model (red dashed contour) is developed for the shelf area
shallower than 200 m depth matching ICES divisions (polygons) 7.e (Western English Channel), 7.f (Bristol Channel), 7.g (Celtic Sea North), 7.h (Celtic South) and
7.j.2 (Southwest of Ireland- East belonging to the NE Atlantic Fisheries Commission regulatory area).
Hernvann and Gascuel, 2020; Mérillet et al., 2020). Nonetheless,
long-term variability in hydro-climatic conditions has also largely
aﬀected the Celtic Sea ecosystem (Beaugrand et al., 2000;
Hernvann and Gascuel, 2020) and the ongoing climate change
may greatly impact the basal ecosystem production (McGinty
et al., 2011), ﬁsh populations (Brunel and Boucher, 2007), and
entire communities (ter Hofstede et al., 2010; Simpson et al.,
2011) of the Celtic Sea.
In this study, we analyzed the interdependent impacts of
ﬁshing and climate change on the structure and functioning of
marine ecosystems using the Celtic Sea as a regional case study.
We developed a spatially-explicit trophic model for the Celtic Sea
to represent the eﬀects of the environment on the distribution
and productivity of functional groups, from phytoplankton to
top predators. Multiple data types were considered for this aim.
Spatio-temporal dynamics of plankton groups were represented
in the spatially-explicit trophic model using the predictions
of remote sensing based models. The responses of higher
trophic level functional groups to changes in the environment
were represented using the predictions of statistical habitat
models, which were ﬁtted to data from large scale survey and
environmental databases. This overall information was used
to calibrate the trophic model and determine how changes in
primary production, zooplankton habitat and temperature may
have interacted with ﬁshing to shape the Celtic Sea food-web
dynamics over the period 1985ñ2016. Then, the spatial structure
and functioning of the Celtic Sea food web were analyzed for
contrasted years in terms of environmental conditions to better
understand the processes of changes in the Celtic Sea ecosystem
over the studied decades.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The EwE Framework in a Nutshell and
General Approach to Model the Trophic
Functioning of the Celtic Sea
The EwE Modeling Framework in a Nutshell
Our approach relies on the Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE)
framework (Pauly et al., 2000; Christensen and Walters, 2004).
Hereafter, we only brieﬂy summarize the EwE modeling steps
since more details about the EwE framework and its main
equations can be found in Christensen and Walters (2004) and
are summed up in Supplementary Appendix SA.
Ecopath is the basal component of EwE, and provides a
snapshot of the ecosystem of interest for a given period, i.e.,
generally a speciﬁc year. Ecopath represents the ecosystem of
interest through functional groups (i.e., groups of species/taxa
that have similar trophic and ecological niches and life-history
characteristics) that exchange matter and energy through trophic
relationships while the mass balance between the production of
each functional group and all consumptions is assumed.
Ecosim is the dynamic module of EwE that allows for hindcast
or forecast of changes in functional group biomasses. Ecosim
predator-prey dynamics (under top-down or bottom-up control)
are determined based on the foraging arena theory (Ahrens
et al., 2012) whereby vulnerability coeﬃcients modulate the
proportion of prey biomass accessible to predators by altering
predator consumption rates. Vulnerability coeﬃcients can be
estimated by ﬁtting Ecosim to observed biomass, abundance or
catch time-series. The response of the ecosystem to stressors
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 3 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 4
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 2 | Schematic of the data integration framework used to build and calibrate the Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) with Ecospace model. Gray rectangles
represent data or EwE input. Blue rectangles correspond to statistical model runs to estimate EwE inputs from data.
can be simulated in Ecosim: (1) time-series of ﬁshing eﬀort
or ﬁshing mortalities can, respectively, drive exploited groups
dynamics through top-down processes; (2) time-series of primary
production can drive phytoplankton dynamics controlling
bottom-up the food-web; and (3) environmental time-series can
aﬀect the consumption rates of predators according to linear
response of following speciﬁc user-deﬁned functional responses.
Ecospace is the spatial component of EwE, which predicts
the spatial distribution of functional group biomasses over a
horizontal 2-D grid (Walters, 1999; Pauly et al., 2000). The most
recent version of Ecospace includes an habitat foraging capacity
model that determines the suitability of each model grid cell for a
functional group as the relative proportion of the cell over which
the group can feed (Christensen et al., 2014). Each grid cell’s
capacity is calculated as the product of functions that reﬂect the
preferences of the group of interest for speciﬁc environmental
parameter values.
General Approach of Integrated Trophic Modeling in
the Celtic Sea
The Celtic Sea ecosystem was previously modeled by Moullec
et al. (2017) using the Ecopath and Ecosim modules of EwE
to represent its dynamics and ﬁshing impact between 1980
and 2013. However, this model relied on a limited amount
of ﬁeldwork data and did not investigate the eﬀect of any
environmental driver and their spatial heterogeneity on
ecosystem structure and functioning over this period. To
improve the ecological realism of the Celtic Sea food-web
model, we develop an integrated trophic modeling approach
consisting in successively (i) updating the Ecopath model and
integrating local trophic data to deﬁne trophic relationships,
(ii) exploring spatio-temporal changes in the dynamic of
plankton groups, (iii) investigating the environmental drivers
of high trophic levels, including temperature, and studying
their spatio-temporal changes, and (iv) integrating ﬁshing
and changes in temporal variation in environmental drivers
of functional groups in the ﬁt of the Ecosim model over
the period 1985ñ2016 and using their spatial distribution
to build the Ecospace model. The diﬀerent steps of this
integrated trophic modeling framework are displayed
in Figure 2.
Updating and Improving the Pre-existing
Celtic Sea Ecopath Model
We updated the pre-existing Ecopath models for 2013 and 1980
(Moullec et al., 2017) and built a new Celtic Sea Ecopath model
for the year 1985. The species composition of a few functional
groups was reﬁned for a greater coherence in the diet of the
species they contain (see details in Supplementary Appendix
SB). A major upgrade of the Celtic Sea model was the provision
of a new diet matrix for the Ecopath model, estimated using
the Bayesian integrated model “EcoDiet” and its R package
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 4 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 5
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
implementation (Hernvann et al., in press; Théro et al., 2020) 1,2.
EcoDiet allows to simultaneously estimate diet proportions of all
functional groups by integrating multiple data types, i.e., stomach
content analyses, biotracer analyses and literature knowledge.
Here, EcoDiet was applied to trophic analyses conducted on
ﬁsh collected in the Celtic Sea during a ﬁsheries-independent
survey as part of the EATME project (Issac et al., 2017; Rault
et al., 2017; Day et al., 2019), and information from an updated
bibliographic search. The new model comprised a total of 50
single and multispecies functional groups, including exploited
ﬁshes and invertebrates, non-commercial benthic invertebrates
(ﬁve groups), zoo- and phyto- plankton (four and two groups,
respectively), and mammals and seabirds (four groups). Some
of these functional groups were further split into younger and
older life-stage groups (cod Gadus morhua , hake Merluccius
merluccius, and anglerﬁsh Lophius sp.) based on onthogenetic
changes in diet identiﬁed by stomach content analyses (Issac
et al., 2017; Day et al., 2019). Details on the Celtic Sea
Ecopath model, its parameters, and the species it represents
can be found in Supplementary Appendix SB . The validity
of the 1985 Ecopath model was analyzed using the standard
PREBAL diagnostics (Link, 2010;Supplementary Appendix SB).
Representing the Dynamics of Plankton
Groups
Spatial-temporal changes in the production of phytoplankton
groups (primary production, PP) were taken from the Vertically
Generalized Production Model (VGPM, Behrenfeld and
Falkowski, 1997) for the period 1998ñ2016, and from a regional
application of hydrodynamic-biogeochemical NEMO-ERSEM
to the European shelf (Baretta et al., 1995; Madec, 2008;
Edwards et al., 2012; UK Met Oﬃce 3) for the period 1985ñ
1997. The VGPM model uses remote-sensed chlorophyll- a
data collected by SeaWiFS and MODIS-Aqua to quantify PP
over the entire water column (Morel and Berthon, 1989).
PP is one of the direct outputs of the NEMO-ERSEM model
and was extracted over the entire water column to align
with the VGPM outputs. Data products were obtained from
the Ocean Productivity website 4 and the E.U. Copernicus
Marine Environment Monitoring Service 5 (eu), respectively.
Time-series of PP in the Celtic Sea were used to force the
productivity of phytoplankton groups in Ecosim (Christensen
et al., 2009; Mackinson et al., 2009) while annual maps of
primary productivity were used in Ecospace (Steenbeek et al.,
2013). PP maps averaged by 5-year periods are provided in
Supplementary Appendix SC.
The spatio-temporal changes of the suitable feeding
habitat of zooplankton (small and large mesozooplankton,
macrozooplankton) were estimated for the 1998ñ2016 period
using a niche model of mesozooplankton in the North Atlantic
1https://github.com/pyhernvann/EcoDiet
2https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/EcoDiet/index.html
3https://www.metoﬃce.gov.uk/
4http://sites.science.oregonstate.edu/ocean.productivity/
5https://marine.copernicus.eu/
(Druon et al., 2019). This zooplankton suitable habitat (ZSH)
model relies on the identiﬁcation of productivity fronts at
mesoscale. Because these fronts persist long enough in the
pelagic realm (at least 3 to 4 weeks), they allow the production
of elevated biomass of mesozooplankton which, in turn, can
sustain higher trophic level organisms. The mesozooplankton
habitat model is ﬁtted to data of the Continuous Plankton
Recorder (CPR) and relies on remotely-sensed horizontal
gradients of chlorophyll-a (SeaWiFS and MODIS-Aqua sensors).
This habitat model only results of the daily observation
of productivity fronts by satellite sensors, therefore the
ZSH model is an algorithm that translates chlorophyll- a
distribution directly into a daily habitat value. Seasonal maps
of ZSH in the Celtic Sea are provided in Supplementary
Appendix SC.
Linking the Dynamics of Higher Trophic
Level Organisms to Environment
To characterize the response of higher trophic level organisms
to environment, we determined functional relationships for
38 Ecopath groups (over 45 high trophic level groups,
excluding mammals and birds, and benthic meiofauna) using
the statistical habitat modeling approach developed by Grüss
et al. (2020, 2018). This approach involved the following
steps: (1) the construction of ﬁsheries-independent survey and
environmental databases; (2) the development of generalized
additive models (GAMs); and (3) the use of the GAMs to estimate
functional relationships.
Construction of Survey and Environmental Databases
For each functional group, presence/absence (encounter/non-
encounter) data were collected by 13 International Bottom
Trawl Surveys (IBTS; Cronne, 2016) conducted between 1987
and 2017 in European waters ( Supplementary Appendix
SD; ICES database) 6. We allocated presence/absence data,
collected by the surveys (only 3 surveys for 4 low TL benthic
invertebrates groups; Supplementary Appendix SD ), to a
0.125◦ spatial grid to address the issue of heterogeneity in
sampling schemes (Grüss et al., 2020). A set of environmental
variables were compiled for all of these grid cells. These
environmental variables included time-invariant topographic
and habitat variables: bathymetry, distance to the coast, and
percentages of seabed substrate types. The environmental
variables also included hydro-climatic time-varying variables:
surface (ﬁrst 10 m) and bottom sea temperature, salinity and
dissolved oxygen concentration, and surface phytoplankton
concentration. Spatial-temporal estimates of these variables for
each grid cell at a monthly resolution were obtained from
the General Bathymetric Chart of the Oceans (GEBCO) 7, the
European Marine Observation and Data Network (EMODnet) 8,
and the Copernicus platform. More details are provided in
Supplementary Appendix SD.
6https://www.ices.dk/data/data-portals/Pages/DATRAS.aspx
7https://www.gebco.net/
8https://www.emodnet-seabedhabitats.eu/
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 5 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 6
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
GAM Fitting
The literature was screened to determine which of the variables
included in the environmental database may inﬂuence the spatial
distribution patterns of each functional group. This list was
reduced through a collinearity analysis to avoid the selection of
variables that are strongly correlated with one another together or
with eastings and northings (longitude and latitude expressed in
UTM coordinates) (Grüss et al., 2018). Then, for each functional
group, we ﬁtted binomial GAMs of the following form to the
presence/absence data from the survey database (“mgcv” package
in the R environment Wood, 2017):
g (η)= te (X, Y)+ s (x1)+ s (x2)+ . . .+
s (xn)+ factor
(
Survey
)
+ factor (Year) (1)
where η is the probability of presence of the functional group; g
is the logit link function between η and each predictor; te(X,Y)
is a tensor product smooth ﬁtted to eastings and northings that
accounts for spatial autocorrelation at broad scale; x1, x 2,. . .,
xn are the predictors from the environmental database; s is
a thin plate regression spline ﬁtted to a given predictor and
limited to four degrees of freedom for interpretability; and
Survey and Year are treated as ﬁxed-eﬀect factors (Farmer and
Karnauskas, 2013; Grüss et al., 2018). Only predictors with a
signiﬁcant eﬀect (statistical criteria detailed in Supplementary
Appendix SE ) were kept in the GAMs, and the models
were evaluated using the interactive cross-validation procedure
described in Grüss et al. (2018). More details can be found in
Supplementary Appendix SE.
Production of Preference Functions
Fitted GAMs were utilized to produce preference functions (also
called functional reponses below) expressing for the preferences
of each functional group for speciﬁc environmental parameter
values. For each environmental variable i integrated in a
GAM, predictions were made with the GAM over a vector of
values ranging between the minimum and maximum values of
environmental variable i in the Celtic Sea, while: (1) setting
eastings X and northings Y at their values at the barycenter
of the Celtic Sea; (2) keeping the other variables at their mean
value from the GAM modeled dataset; and (3) setting the Survey
and Year factors at their mode from the GAM modeled dataset.
GAM predictions were then rescaled to provide preferences
functions ranging between 0 and 1, which account for the
relative eﬀects of each environmental variable on the probability
of presence of the functional group of interest. The procedure
for rescaling follows Grüss et al., 2018 and is described in
Supplementary Appendix SE.
Fitting Ecosim and Building Ecospace
Ecosim
The Ecosim model was ﬁrst ﬁtted to observed biomasses
from available ICES stock assessments, abundance indices from
scientiﬁc surveys for ﬁsh (EVHOE; Duhamel et al., 2018; UK-
WCGFS, CEFAS), the CPR survey 9 for plankton (Johns, 2019),
9https://www.cprsurvey.org/
and catch time-series (Statlant)10. Time-series of ﬁshing mortality
(for assessed stocks) or catch (for non-assessed stocks) were
used as forcing functions. A summary of the time-series used
is provided in Supplementary Appendix SF. Ecosim calibration
was conducted using the stepwise ﬁtting procedure implemented
into EwE by Scott et al. (2016) and following the protocol
found in Bentley et al. (2019) to determine the most suitable
number of predator-prey dynamics parameters (vulnerabilities
Vs) to estimate. To assess the relative impacts of ﬁshing
and environment on the ecosystem, we adopted an approach
similar to the one developed by Mackinson (2014). We applied
the ﬁtting procedure, integrating ﬁshing forcing functions
only, then integrating the environmental drivers of plankton
and ﬁsh dynamics, ﬁrst separately and then simultaneously.
PP and zooplankton suitable habitat (ZSH) time-series drove
the production of phytoplankton groups (see Christensen
et al., 2009) and the consumption of zooplankton (small
and large mesozooplankton, macrozooplankton), respectively.
More speciﬁcally, ZSH time-series were used as multiplier of
the arena area for zooplankton-phytoplankton interactions, of
zooplankton vulnerability for ﬁsh-zooplankton interactions, and
of both parameters for zooplankton-zooplankton interactions
(see Supplementary Appendix SF ; Dahood et al., 2019).
Temperature variations and corresponding preference functions
to the model drove the consumption of ﬁsh groups (foraging
environmental response; see Bentley et al., 2017; Serpetti et al.,
2017; Corrales et al., 2018). In order to avoid any potential
confounding eﬀects with temperature-induced changes, that we
precisely wanted to quantify in this study, we chose to not
use the available information on recruitment anomalies (e.g.,
from stock assessments) as forcing function of the dynamics
of functional groups represented by multiple life-stages. To
quantify the relative contribution of each driver, the various ﬁts
of the models were compared using the sum of squares between
observed and predicted time-series and the bias-corrected Akaike
information criterion (AICc) of the model (Akaike, 1974). We
addressed the uncertainty in Ecopath input parameters in Ecosim
outputs through the Monte Carlo uncertainty routine based on
conﬁdence intervals determined from Pedigrees (Heymans et al.,
2016; Steenbeek et al., 2018). More details on the ﬁtting procedure
can be found in Supplementary Appendix SF.
Ecospace
The ﬁtted Ecosim scenario was run over the period 1985ñ2016,
and the “Ecopath model from Ecosim” plug-in (Steenbeek et al.,
2016) was employed to generate 6 Ecopath models corresponding
to mean conditions over successive 5-year periods (from 1985ñ
1989 to 2005ñ2010, and 2011ñ2016 for the last period). Ecospace
models were built for each of the 5-year periods to facilitate the
comparison of spatial distributions through time and run over a
spin-up period of 5 years. The Ecospace models integrated the
average maps of PP to force its distribution, those of ZSH to feed
the distribution of habitat foraging capacity for zooplankton, and
those of environmental variables employed in the GAMs and the
10https://www.ices.dk/data/dataset-collections/Pages/Fish-catch-and-stock-
assessment.aspx
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 6 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 7
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
associated preference functions of higher TL groups to spatially
distribute ﬁsh habitat foraging capacities (Coll et al., 2016; Grüss
et al., 2018, 2016). Trophic and diversity indicators (Table 1) were
projected based on functional groups’ distributions, partly using
the ECOIND plug-in (Coll and Steenbeek, 2017). This approach
decoupling temporal and spatial changes will be further discussed
in the Discussion section. Parameters of the Ecospace model are
given in Supplementary Appendix SG.
RESULTS
Improvement of Ecosim Model Fit and
Relative Importance of Ecosystem
Drivers
The statistically best model was obtained when trophic
interactions, ﬁshing, and environment were included together
in the model ﬁtting (SS = 340 and AICc = −3365, Table 2),
hence improving the model ﬁt by 86%. The proportions of
each driver in the Sum of Square SS reduction suggest that
ﬁshing was the main driver of ecosystem changes, followed
by trophic interactions and, with much lower but signiﬁcant
contributions, the environment ( Table 2 and Figure 3 ).
Temperature eﬀects on higher trophic levels and overall changes
in low trophic levels productivity had similar weight in the
ﬁt. Integrated independently from plankton data, temperature
forcing especially increased the hindcast quality for species with
thermal preferenda at outside the temperature ranged covered in
the Celtic Sea (warmer or colder, Figure 3B). Conversely, PP and
ZHS integration essentially led to a better ﬁt for functional groups
belonging to the pelagic pathway.
Predicted Historical Trends for
Functional Groups Abundance
Low Trophic Levels
With regard to the basal productivity in the Celtic Sea ecosystem,
no clear trend was apparent in the Ecosim model over the
period 1985ñ2016. Despite this relative stability, some diﬀerences
can be observed in CPR time-series within the phytoplankton
community. Most signiﬁcant changes in observed phytoplankton
data occurred during the late 1980s when the abundance
of large phytoplankton (diatoms and dinoﬂagellates) dropped
whereas the one of small phytoplankton increased ( Figure 4 ).
However, the trends for both large phytoplankton and small
phytoplankton were not correctly captured by Ecosim and
remained overall constant over the entire period 1985ñ2016 in
the model.
Similarly to PP , the ZSH remained stable over the study
period, yet, looking at the data, substantial changes were
observed within the zooplankton community, mostly during
the late 1980s. When PP and ZSH were integrated, Ecosim
reproduced the overall observed trend in small mesozooplankton
abundance, which substantially declined before 1990 and
was still decreasing until the mid-2000s. By contrast, large
mesozooplankton abundance tended to increase over the period
1985ñ2016. Again for this zooplankton group, the trend
predicted by Ecosim correctly matched observations both in
terms of trend and of amplitude of variations. Both trends
and interannual variability in zooplankton abundance were
not captured when PP and ZSH were not included in the ﬁt
(Figure 4 ). The stability in the predicted phytoplankton time-
series precludes us from linking changes in mesozooplankton
abundance with changes in primary productivity in the Celtic
TABLE 1 | Indicators used to analyze spatial changes in the Celtic Sea structure over the period 1985–2016.
Acronym Indicator Unit Deﬁnition References
SOI System Omnivory Index – Mean standard deviation of trophic levels in the diets Libralato, 2013
K Kempton’s diversity index – Trophic group’s diversity Ainsworth and Pitcher, 2006
MTL Mean trophic level TL Mean trophic level of the community (TL ≥ 2) Christensen et al., 2008
BTL=x Total biomass at TL threshold x tones Total biomass of groups with TL superior or equal to x Christensen et al., 2008
HTI High Trophic Indicator % Percentage of predators with TL ≥ 4 among the consumers Bourdaud et al., 2016
TABLE 2 | Results of the Ecosim ﬁtting procedure.
Scenario Vs/Predator Vs/Predator-Prey K minSS AICc
Baseline 0 0 0 3082 879
Trophic interaction 40 13 53 2195 318
Fishing 0 0 0 1248 −905
Trophic interactions+ Fishing 45 7 52 385 −3119
Trophic interactions+ Fishing+ Plankton forcing 45 8 53 383 −3128
Trophic interactions+ Fishing+ Temperature 29 14 43 394 −3093
Trophic interactions + Fishing + Plankton forcing + Temperature 46 6 52 340 −3365
Vs columns indicate the number of vulnerability parameters that have been estimated and whether they have been estimated by predator or by couple predator-prey. K
is the total number of parameters estimated by the model, which is equal to the number of Vs estimated as no PP anomaly is estimated. The maximum number for K
to avoid overﬁtting is 56 (Supplementary Appendix SE). The best model in terms of minSS, the sum of squares between observed and predicted values reached at the
end of the ﬁt, and AICc is the one including both trophic interactions, ﬁshing, plankton-related data and temperature effect on high trophic level groups. The best model
statistically is written in bold.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 7 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 8
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 3 | Changes in the temporal ﬁt of the Ecosim model: (A) mean gain
in the Sum of Square (SS) when integrating each driver in the ﬁtting
procedure: “Trophic” when estimating the vulnerabilities, “Fishing” when
integrating ﬁshing mortality time-series and forced catches, “Plankton” when
integrating primary production (PP) and zooplankton suitable habitat (ZSH),
“Temperature” when integrating sea surface temperature (SST) and sea
bottom temperature (SBT) – Plankton and Temperature data were integrated
only in the models accounting for Trophic interactions and Fitting;.
(B) Changes in the SS for pelagic species and species with temperature
optimum outside the Celtic Sea temperature range according to the different
environmental drivers integrated in the ﬁt. (C) Trends in the forcing variables –
F is the mean ﬁshing mortality time-series for stocks under assessment.
Sea between 1985 and 2016. Although Ecosim was able to
correctly predict the overall zooplankton abundance level over
the study period, the predictions did not perfectly match the
observed patterns, especially at the beginning of the time-
series.
FIGURE 4 | Observed (points; CPR) vs. predicted (lines; Ecosim) changes in
the plankton community of the Celtic Sea over the period 1985–2016. Black
line: best ﬁtted model, including trophic interactions, ﬁshing, PP , ZSH and
temperature; green line: with integration of PP and ZSH but without
(Continued)
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 8 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 9
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 4 | temperature forcing; orange line: with integration of temperature
forcing but without PP and ZSH. The gray shaded area is delimited by the
95% intervals of the Monte Carlo runs that propagate the uncertainty on
Ecopath input parameters to Ecosim. The points correspond to observed
time-series used during Ecosim calibration.
Higher Trophic Levels
The observed time-series of biomass, abundance and catch of
most of high trophic level groups were satisfactorily reproduced
by Ecosim. Overall, Ecosim predictions were better for those
single-species groups for which stock assessments are carried out
than for multispeciﬁc ﬁsh groups, and they were less consistent
for exploited invertebrate groups.
In 1985, main target species such as large Gadiformes
[e.g., hake, cod, whiting ( Merlangius merlangus ), haddock
(Melanogrammus aegleﬁnus )], large ﬂatﬁsh species [i.e., sole
(Solea solea), plaice ( Pleuronectes platessa)], anglerﬁsh, megrim
(Lepidorhombus whiﬃagonis ), sea bass ( Dicentrarchus labrax ),
other large piscivorous demersal ﬁsh [e.g., saithe ( Pollachius
virens), ling (Molva molva), pollock (Pollachius pollachius), turbot
(Psetta maxima ), conger ( Conger conger )] and forage ﬁsh [i.e.,
herring (Clupea harengus), mackerel ( Scomber scombrus), horse
mackerel ( Trachurus trachurus )] were already subject to high
ﬁshing mortality that far exceeded natural losses. Driven by
an increase in ﬁshing mortality, the biomass of most of these
groups declined between 1985 and the mid-2000s while their
catches simultaneously stabilized or decreased. In 2005, their
ﬁshing mortality decreased and Ecosim predicted a stabilization
of their abundance that preceded a progressive recovery from
2010 onward (Figure 5).
The pressure exerted on species that were initially less
exploited such as smaller ﬂatﬁsh (i.e., endobenthivorous),
medium demersal ﬁsh (i.e., epibenthivorous), or cephalopods
increased after 1985. Concomitantly, the natural mortality
exerted on these species decreased as a result of the depletion of
highly commercial groups such as large predatory ﬁsh (e.g., hake,
cod, whiting, megrim). The predicted biomass trends of lower
TL ﬁsh and invertebrates varied according to their exploitation
patterns (Figure 5). Dramatic changes in the composition of the
pelagic community were also predicted by Ecosim. In parallel
to horse mackerel depletion, the biomass of pelagic ﬁshes that
feed upon similar ressources such as suprabenthivorous ﬁsh,
sprat ( Sprattus sprattus ) or boarﬁsh ( Capros aper ) increased,
while these pelagic ﬁshes were initially almost absent from the
Celtic Sea ecosystem.
The recovery of commercial species in the 2010s is noticeable,
particularly the large increases in the biomasses of large
predators, including hake (whose biomass increased 5-fold) and
a few other species. According to the model, these species
recoveries translated into an increase in predation pressure from
large predators and a decline in the abundance of cephalopods,
small pelagic and small demersal ﬁsh.
The rising temperatures resulting from climate forcing had
various eﬀects on the diﬀerent species represented in the
model, and they mainly impacted ﬁsh productivity during
the mid-1990, when a substantial increase in both surface
and bottom temperatures was observed. As highlighted by
the comparison of model’s ﬁt on observed data according
to scenarios ( Figures 3B , 5), the integration of temperature
forcing allowed to better capture the overall trends in the
abundance of Boreal and Lusitanian species. The foraging ability
of Boreal species, including cod, plaice, whiting, herring and
endobenthivorous demersal ﬁsh, dropped at the same time that
ﬁshing mortality increased, and this accentuated the depletion of
the above-mentioned species. Conversely, for Lusitanian species
that have warmer thermal preferences, such as sardine, boarﬁsh,
hake and cephalopods, increased productivity in the Celtic Sea
ecosystem in the 1990s acted antagonistically to the increasing
ﬁshing pressure and synergistically with decreasing competition
pressure. The diﬀerential trends in the productivity of warm and
cold water aﬃnity species between the start and the end of the
study period were responsible for diﬀerences in the recovery
capacities of commercial groups in the 2010s. For instance, cod
biomass remains quite stable when temperature is not driving
productivity, and plaice recovers much slower from ﬁshing
pressure release. Conversely, sole depletion in the ﬁrst part of the
time-series is stronger as its recovery is strengthened ( Figure 5).
These variations triggered changes in the ﬁsh assemblages.
Interannual variability in high trophic level abundance was better
reproduced when incorporating PP and ZSH data, especially for
pelagic species (Figure 5).
Predicted Spatial Distribution of
Food-Web Components in the Celtic Sea
Habitat Projection for the Celtic Sea
Evaluation tests suggested that GAMs ( Supplementary
Appendix SE ) were good enough to produce yearly foraging
habitat maps for the 38 higher trophic level functional groups
(year 2016, Supplementary Appendix SE ). The tests also
indicated that GAM ﬁts and predictive capacities were better
for monospeciﬁc groups than for heterogeneous multispecies
groups. The ﬁt was also lower when the sampling gear employed
during the surveys was not adapted to a given functional
group (e.g., benthic invertebrates). The type of environmental
predictors retained in ﬁnal GAMs varied across functional
groups, as their number, ranging from 3 for the non-commercial
invertebrate groups to 9 for hake. The preference functions
estimated from ﬁtted GAMs exhibited diverse shapes. The
retained predictors often included bathymetry (32 groups) and
temperature (surface or bottom; 35 groups), two variables of
importance in shaping the Celtic Sea environment. Depth in the
Celtic Sea drove marked northeast-southwest gradients, while
surface temperature led to pronounced latitudinal gradients and
bottom temperature resulted in two opposed pools of warm
and cold waters in the English and Bristol Channel and in
southern Ireland.
Salinity functional responses quantify habitat suitability in the
riverine-inﬂuenced Bristol Channel. When they were retained
in ﬁnal GAMs, seabed substrate variables resulted in patchy
predicted habitats for demersal species. In those instances, it was
possible to make a clear distinction between restricted areas of
rocky or mixed substrate and large irregular strands of muddy,
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 9 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 10
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 5 | Fitted biomass trends from the Ecosim model for a selection of demersal and pelagic ﬁsh species. Black line: best ﬁtted model, including trophic
interactions, ﬁshing, PP , ZSH and temperature; green line: with integration of PP and ZSH but without temperature forcing; orange line: with integration of
temperature forcing but without PP and ZSH. The gray shaded area is delimited by the 95% intervals of the Monte Carlo runs that propagate the uncertainty on
Ecopath input parameters to Ecosim. The color points indicate the different time-series of observed data during Ecosim calibration.
sandy or coarse sediments. The other environmental variables
considered in the present study were less frequently retained
in ﬁnal GAMs. Habitat foraging capacity maps for the period
1985ñ1989 are provided in Supplementary Appendix SE.
Predicted Biomass Distributions
The Ecospace model predicted the biomass distribution of
all components of the ecosystem, from the phytoplankton
to top predators. The biomass distributions of functional
groups reﬂected the overall habitat foraging capacities of
these groups, hence their ecological niche, but were also
inﬂuenced by their trophic interactions with prey, predators and
competitors (Figure 6).
The distributions of those functional groups for which no
GAM was developed were estimated by Ecospace only according
to their feeding relationships (birds, mammals, bacteria, benthic
meiofauna, large pelagic ﬁsh). A wide variety of spatial patterns
were exhibited by the functional groups represented in Ecospace.
Due to their high mobility in the water column and their
eurythermic characteristics, horse mackerel and mackerel were
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 10 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 11
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 6 | Predicted biomass distribution in 2016 for functional groups for which statistical habitat models (generalized additive models) were developed. Biomass
is represented in relative units, i.e., scaled on the highest density predicted in the Celtic Sea. The color scale represents the relative abundance of the considered
group, from zero (blue) to the maximum (red).
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 11 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 12
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
predicted to be the most widely distributed monospeciﬁc groups
in the Celtic Sea ecosystem ( Figure 6 ). Other ﬁsh groups that
were predicted to occupy a large fraction of the Celtic Sea
were multispeciﬁc groups such as benthivorous elasmobranchs,
epibenthivorous demersal ﬁsh, pouts ( Trisopterus minutus and
T. luscus) and benthic cephalopods, which are all made of several
species and, therefore, display a broader, composite ecological
niche. By contrast, some species were predicted to occupy only
a relatively small fraction of the Celtic Sea ecosystem. This
was particularly the case for benthic groups, which are highly
dependent on the seabed substrate. For instance, the distribution
of Norway lobster (Nephrops norvegicus) was restricted to muddy
patches in the western part of the central Celtic Sea where
the species can more easily bury in mud. Ecospace modeling
allowed us to distinguish between groups that have similar
trophic niches but diﬀerent environmental niches. Thus, sole
and plaice have similar diets but showed limited spatial overlap
because of their, respectively, warm and cold water aﬃnities;
the same was observed for sardine ( Sardina pilchardus ) and
herring. Species that are taxonomically close such as the gadoids
cod, haddock and whiting were shown to regularly coexist
in the same areas but could also have substantially diﬀerent
distributions: whiting inhabited shallower areas than cod and
haddock; both haddock and cod had aﬃnities for muddy
areas, but haddock also frequented sandy substrates whereas
cod preferred coarse sediments. The distributions of adults
and juveniles for hake, anglerﬁsh and cod were comparable
yet exhibited some diﬀerences (i.e., juveniles showed a greater
aﬃnity for muddy substrates), which highlighted the relevance
of representing multiple stanzas for some species in Ecospace
to better simulate changes in spatial distribution and predation
pressure over ﬁsh life cycle and the potential for cannibalism.
Species Assemblages
The distribution of functional groups provided a view on ﬁsh
community assemblages in the Celtic Sea ecosystem. Very coastal
areas and bays around Ireland, United Kingdom and France
and the inner Bristol Channel were found to be inhabited
by functional groups tolerant to low salinities, such as large
concentrations of benthic invertebrates, small benthivorous
organisms and, upper in the surface, suprabenthivorous and
small epipelagic ﬁsh (i.e., herring, sardine, sprat). Higher trophic
levels in these areas were mainly represented by whiting
and sea bass. Also, intense primary and secondary pelagic
production took place in these areas. Areas next to the shelf
edge, located from the tip of Brittany to southwestern Ireland,
were characterized by deeper waters with a steeper slope. Here,
abundant populations of megrim, hake, anglerﬁsh and other
piscivorous demersal ﬁsh were found together with widely
distributed pelagic ﬁsh species such as boarﬁsh, blue whiting
(Micromesistius poutassou ), mackerel and horse mackerel.
Benthic invertebrates in these areas were mainly deposit and
suspension feeders. Primary production was observed limited in
these areas, but the pelagic habitat was favorable to zooplankton
development. In the cold central and northwestern Celtic
Sea, the mix of sediment types and the moderate depth was
favorable to diverse demersal species, including epibenthivorous
demersal ﬁsh, hake, anglerﬁsh and three gadoid species, cod,
haddock and whiting. Mackerel and horse mackerel were the
dominant pelagic species in this area. The density of benthic
carnivores and necrophageous invertebrates was especially high
in this area. Finally, the Western English Channel and the
outer Bristol Channel diﬀered from the other regions of
the Celtic Sea by their relatively warm waters and coarse
substrate and their higher plankton productivity sustained by
mesoscale structures. The Western English Channel and the outer
Bristol Channel were characterized by the presence of small
benthivorous ﬁsh, epibenthivorous ﬁsh, pouts, ﬂatﬁsh (plaice
and sole), commercial invertebrates (crustaceans and bivalves),
cephalopods species, some gadoid species, and a mix of pelagic
species including mainly horse mackerel and mackerel but also
small epipelagic species.
Temporal Changes in Functional Groups’
Distributions
Overall, relative habitat capacity was constant for most functional
groups over the study period. Most changes in relative habitat
capacity occurred between the late 1980s and the mid-1990s
(Figure 7 ). The intensity of changes was variable across
functional groups and can be related to the water temperature
preferences of functional groups. The ﬁtted GAMs indeed
highlighted that temperature, which is the variable most aﬀected
by climatic changes in the area, was an ecological niche
descriptor common to almost all components of the ecosystem.
Thus, changes in the modeled habitats over the studied period
were observed for those functional groups with most extreme
thermal preferences in the Celtic Sea such as pilchard ( Sardina
pilchardus), sea bass, medium pelagic ﬁsh and squids (mainly
or exclusively composed of Lusitanian species), as well as cod,
haddock, sprat, herring, endobenthivorous ﬁsh and whiting
(mainly or exclusively composed of Boreal species).
Functional groups dominated by Boreal species illustrate
biomass distribution changes related to environment ( Figure 8).
Most changes in the distribution of species that prefer cold waters
occurred early in the study period, with a slight contraction of the
area occupied by these species in the eastern and southwestern
Celtic Sea in response to the more intense warming of already
warm bottom waters in those areas. For the remainder of the
study period, the relative distribution of biomass of Boreal species
remained relatively stable.
Ecosystem Indicators
Primary production in the Celtic Sea ( Figure 9A) was essentially
located in coastal areas, from the southern coast of Ireland to the
Western English Channel and western Brittany, and along the
southern part of the Celtic Sea shelf break. Diﬀerences in primary
production between the lowest and the highest productive areas
never exceed a factor of four. The biomass of secondary producers
(i.e., zooplankton and benthic invertebrates that not carnivorous;
Figure 9B) was more spread over the shelf and did not display
similarly high densities in the center of the Western English
Channel. The total biomass of high trophic level groups (i.e.,
TL≥ 3; Figure 9C) was less variable over space and more patchy.
The biomass of primary and secondary producers in the Celtic
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 12 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 13
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 7 | Index of change in the spatial distribution of functional groups’ habitat in relation to their thermal preferences between the 1985–1989 and 1995–1999
periods and between the 1985–1989 and 2010–2016 periods: Left: Values by functional group and averages over functional groups according to their temperature
preferenda (cold, warm and intermediary corresponding to groups with thermal preferendum lower than, higher than, or within the range of temperatures in the Celtic
Sea, respectively). The index is the absolute difference between 1 and the slope of the linear regression between Ecospace model cells’ values of relative habitat for
the 1985–1989 period and the two other periods. Right: mean index per group of thermal afﬁnity, “cold,” “intermediate,” and “warm” for species with thermal
preferendum, respectively, inferior, within, and superior to the temperature range covered in the Celtic Sea over 1985–2016.
FIGURE 8 | Predicted changes in the total biomass of Boreal demersal species. (A) Mean biomass distribution (t.km-2) for the period 1985–1989 and temperature
(◦C) for the same period. Relative changes of Boreal demersal species biomass are displayed in (B) 1990–1994; (C) 1995–1999; (D): 2010–2016 and calculated as
the ratio between these selected periods and the initial biomass. In (B–D) the colors correspond to the ratio of absolute biomass between the predicted biomass
and biomass for 1985–1989. The black lines delimit areas for which the fraction in the total Celtic Sea Boreal demersal species biomass increased (“+” area) and
decrease (“–” area) compared to 1985–1989.
Sea was concentrated around particular areas, mainly around the
coasts and in the English Channel, and this available production
is eﬃciently transferred to higher trophic levels and then likely
spread horizontally.
The spatialized mean trophic level (MTL) and high trophic
index (HTI) highlighted that higher trophic levels were mainly
located in the western Celtic Sea. In particular, high values of the
MTL were concentrated in the northwestern Celtic Sea, whereas
the HTI is higher in deeper areas along the shelf-break (Figure 10,
left panel). Areas associated with a high MTL were those
areas that were occupied by many medium to large demersal
functional group including epibenthivorous and piscivorous ﬁsh,
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 13 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 14
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 9 | Primary production in the Celtic Sea and biomass for trophic
levels 2–3.5 and greater than 3.5 in 1985. (A) Primary production; (B) total
biomass for trophic levels 2–3.5; (C) total biomass for tropic levels greater
than 3.
elasmobranchs, gadoids, anglerﬁsh and hake. Areas characterized
by a high HTI were those where the biomasses of hake, megrim
and anglerﬁsh were high. In the eastern part of the Celtic
Sea, the MTL was lower, due the large abundance of small
demersal ﬁsh species feeding on benthic invertebrates (e.g., sole,
plaice, small benthivorous ﬁsh) in this area, particularly medium
and epipelagic species, which dominate in the Western English
Channel. In the eastern part of the Celtic Sea, top-predators were
mainly represented by large pelagic sharks and sea bass.
The Kempton’s index highlighted spatial patterns in functional
group diversity. Spatial patterns in functional group diversity
were independent from that of biomass levels. For instance, mean
values of Kempton’s index were found in areas with either low
total biomass (shelf-break) or high total biomass (fronts and
muddy areas) densities. Functional group diversity was found
to be particularly high at the border between the main Celtic
Sea regions identiﬁed previously. The SOI was similar but not
identical to the Kempton’s diversity index. It was highest in the
northwestern part of the central Celtic Sea, which was inhabited
by generalist species and species that can feed on both benthic
invertebrates and ﬁsh, including gadoids and anglerﬁsh, but not
hake which primarily feeds on medium-sized pelagic ﬁsh.
All the indicators displayed measurable variations over time
and space ( Figure 10 , middle panels). The trends in the HTI
and MTL were in opposed directions, which means that the
ratio of low trophic level biomass to total biomass increased
overall but that, in parallel, the proportion of species with a TL
greater than 4 increased. These results were mainly driven by the
dramatic changes in horse mackerel and hake abundances that
occurred over the study period, while, after a deep depletion,
the abundance of most mesopredator in the 2000s returned to
levels similar to the 1980s. For the HTI and MTL, the direction
of the change was the same among Ecospace cells, partly because
the species driving observed changes were widely distributed in
the Celtic Sea region. Trophic diversity declined overall over the
whole Celtic Sea, especially in coastal areas. While functional
groups diversity also declined in the southern Celtic Sea and the
English Channel, it increased in the northwestern part of the
central Celtic Sea. The standard deviations of the four indices
(Figure 10, right panels) highlighted a measurable modiﬁcation
of the whole structure of the Celtic Sea ecosystem over the
period 1985ñ2016, yet some speciﬁc areas were more aﬀected
than others. In particular, the food-web structure of the central
Celtic Sea displayed substantial changes between 1985 and 2016,
which were reﬂected by both an increase in MTL and a decrease
in HTI and SOI. The standard deviation of spatial indices relative
to their mean value also suggests a greater amplitude of changes
occurred in the Kempton index.
DISCUSSION
Integrating Multiple Data Types for More
Ecological Realism in Trophic Models
The data types integrated in the Celtic Sea EwE model
signiﬁcantly improved its ability to represent the functioning
of the Celtic Sea ecosystem by providing a more relevant
picture of the food-web structure and by depicting more
realistically the drivers that rule its dynamics, and notably the
environmental drivers.
Improving the Description of Food-Web Components
and Interactions
To ensure that a food-web model correctly represents the
temporal and spatial dynamics of an ecosystem, trophic
relationships have to be deﬁned as accurately as possible, through
the combined use of classical and novel analyses (Pethybridge
et al., 2018; McCormack et al., 2019). In this study, the use
of outputs of the EcoDiet model (Hernvann et al., in press)
applied to the stomach contents and biotracers compiled within
the recent and extensive EATME project was advantageous to
provide a reliable diet matrix to Ecopath, in better agreement
with local data than by the use of literature alone. Additionally,
the substantial collection of data compiled for the present study
[115 time-series versus 62 in Moullec et al. (2017)] provided new
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 14 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 15
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
FIGURE 10 | Mean values, change and variability in four ecosystem indicators in the Celtic Sea over the period 1985–2016. Mean trophic level MTL (1st line), high
trophic index HTI (2nd line), system omnivory index SOI (3rd line) and Kempton’s diversity index (4th line) as spatialized in Ecospace,(left panels), their change
(difference) between 1985 and 2016 (middle panels), and their standard deviation calculated over the period 1985–2016 (right panels).
insights on the abundance trends of some food-web components,
hence allowing the Celtic Sea EwE model to better capture
ecosystem dynamics. Though the integration of abundance time-
series for multispeciﬁc groups in EwE was informative, the
dynamic of these groups remained poorly understood compared
to the dynamic groups under stock assessment. Gathering
relevant time-series of ﬁshing eﬀort for the period 1985ñ2016
for multispeciﬁc groups would greatly improve the hindcast.
However, the large diversity of gears and métiers from many
countries operating in the Celtic Sea makes this endeavor
particularly challenging.
Primary and Secondary Production
The integration of primary and secondary production related
data in EwE only slightly improved the ﬁt of the Ecosim model.
The reason for such a low improvement was the absence of clear
variation of primary and secondary production in the time-series.
This suggested a relative stability of the hydro-climatic conditions
in the Celtic Sea between 1985 and 2016 as the main driver of
plankton development. PP and ZHS integration allowed a better
hindcast for pelagic functional groups, especially for zooplankton
and some planktivorous ﬁsh, both for trends and interannual
ﬂuctuations, while trends in phytoplankton abundance were
poorly reproduced. This poor ﬁt for phytoplankton groups
illustrates the diﬃculty to represent plankton prey-predator
interactions and zooplankton grazing pressure in EwE models
and the consequence this may have on the prediction of higher
trophic levels. Here, high productivity and biomass levels of
phytoplankton prevent their control by top-down process and
limit their variation in abundance to a very low amplitude.
Despite this lack of realism on the dynamic of phytoplankton,
the information brought on the bottom-up impact of PP and the
development conditions for zooplankton well complemented the
insight on top-down impact exerced by higher trophic levels on
these secondary producers.
Remote sensing data have been increasingly utilized over
the last two decades in marine ecology studies (Chassot et al.,
2011). The use of satellite-derived PP estimates is relatively
common in marine ecosystem modeling (Christensen et al., 2009;
Abdou et al., 2016; Grüss et al., 2016) and has the potential to
become a routine procedure in new generations of ecosystem
models (Lowerre-Barbieri et al., 2019). The main advantages
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 15 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 16
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
of satellite-derived PP estimates are that they derived from
a direct observation and they are accessible at high spatial
resolution, given that regional biogeochemical models are not
always locally available. However, satellite-derived PP estimates
are only available for recent past (the past two decades) and, so
far, they have not been calibrated to provide values for diﬀerent
size classes of phytoplankton (Kramer et al., 2018). In particular,
CPR data suggested that the phytoplankton community went
through measureable changes in the Celtic Sea over the period
1982ñ2016: The PCI index, proxy of the total standing biomass,
increased, while no signiﬁcant trend was detected in the diatom
and dinoﬂagellate (both included in large phytoplankton group)
counts, which suggested an increase in the biomass of nano-
phytoplankton between 1985 and 2016.
Despite the relatively short temporal availability of the
mesozooplankton niche model of Druon et al. (2019), the
endeavor of integrating it in the food-web model turned out
to be particularly promising. In particular, estimates from the
mesozooplankton niche model allowed us to highlight areas of
the Celtic Sea that are favorable to primary production but not
to secondary production, and to identify regions with lower
food availability for high trophic levels or where the grazing
pressure exerted on zooplankton is important. Since the early
2000s, several end-to-end ecosystem models have coupled low
and high trophic level models (i.e., have implemented on-line
two-way coupling), hence allowing for a better representation
of bottom-up and top-down controls within marine ecosystems
(Travers et al., 2009, 2007). However, only a few ecosystem
modelers have managed to implement an on-line two-way
coupling, and it has been more common to develop alternative
ways to link low trophic level and high trophic level dynamics
(Libralato and Solidoro, 2009; Piroddi et al., 2017), such as
forcing the high trophic level model with outputs from a
biogeochemical model (e.g., Halouani et al., 2016). In this context,
forcing future ecosystem models by observation-based primary
productivity and zooplankton habitat would represent a valuable
and conservative alternative approach.
Habitat Modeling
The habitat modeling framework adopted in this study that
relied on GAMs was used to assess and predict the response of
almost all high trophic level groups to warming and to project
the abundance and distribution of each group in the Celtic
Sea. The habitat-derived functional response to temperature
signiﬁcantly improved the ﬁt of the Ecosim model. Here
again, the improvement of model ﬁt was relatively low, as
surface and bottom temperatures appeared to be stable over a
substantial fraction of the study period. Still, this improvement
was substantial for those functional groups that can cope
with extreme temperatures, i.e., which have their temperature
optimum outside out of the range of temperature values occuring
in the Celtic Sea ecosystem (e.g., plaice, cod and sardine).
Despite their interest in predicting past, current, and future
species distributions, habitat modeling approaches have still been
rarely coupled to ecosystem models (Grüss et al., 2016; Coll
et al., 2019; Moullec et al., 2019b). In this study, we successfully
integrated the outputs of a statistical habitat model into a spatial
trophic model. The limited complexity of the GAM smoothers
employed here, together with the choice of modeling probabilities
of presence and not abundances with the GAMs, are in line with
the ecological niche theory (Citores et al., 2020). The European
IBTS survey data employed in this study encompassed a large
range of environmental values, hence providing insights into the
potential response of species groups to the warmer conditions
that could become the norm in the Celtic Sea by the end of
the century. The European IBTS survey dataset recently proved
to be highly valuable to study species distributions (Baudron
et al., 2020; Moriarty et al., 2020) and characterize ecosystem
functioning (Maureaud et al., 2019). The methodology developed
by Grüss et al. (2018, 2020) can integrate as many variables
as desired (e.g., variables measured at diﬀerent locations of
the water column, percentages of diﬀerent substrate types) and
can be applied to any particular representation of functional
groups, including multistanza groups. Thus, the approach of
Grüss et al. (2020, 2018) is an interesting alternative to the
classical and less ﬂexible automatic approach used in Ecospace
(Steenbeek et al., 2016) that imports information from AquaMaps
(aquamaps.org), with more limited and much less accurate
information (Jones et al., 2012).
Note, however, that habitat models quality remained
acceptable but limited for multispecies benthic invertebrate
groups, for which presence/absence data was limited here
to a few French surveys due to the lack of availability and
homogeneity for other surveys. This also stresses the need for
improving large scale sampling for these compartments.
Are we Still Missing Something?
While calibrating the Ecosim model, several periods of time
with a poorer ﬁt were identiﬁed for diﬀerent functional groups.
Early changes in phytoplankton and zooplankton abundances
were hardly reproduced by the Ecosim model. Ecosim failed to
catch the great decline in small mesozooplankton abundance
at the beginning of the time-series, as well as the decline
in diatom and dinoﬂagellate abundances and the increase in
nanophytoplankton abundance. Although it could be due to
wrong trends in PP estimated by the biogeochemical model in
the absence of satellite-derived data, this could also be due to
uncaptured environmental eﬀects. This would be expected as our
study period starts in 1985, only a few years before the occurrence
of abrupt changes in the state of the Celtic Sea ecosystem
(e.g., in terms of turbulence, temperature, salinity and plankton
abundance) that were identiﬁed in a previous study (Hernvann
and Gascuel, 2020), and as Ecosim is not capable of tackling such
ecosystem regime shift dynamics (Walters et al., 1997; Tomczak
et al., 2012). As the stability in the plankton-related time-series
did not allow us to explain their dynamics, the oceanographic
conditions limiting phytoplankton and zooplankton production
may not be the main factors of the regime shift. Several
hypotheses have been proposed for identifying the main drivers
of the severe drop in mesozooplankton abundance that occurred
in the Celtic Sea, including climate drivers or changes in ocean
circulation, but the mechanisms responsible for these changes
(mediating factor of phytoplankton-zooplankton interactions,
direct mortality factor of zooplankton, changes in zooplankton
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 16 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 17
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
species composition, changes in phytoplankton composition,
etc.) remain elusive (Pitois and Fox, 2006). In this context, EwE
modeling exercises that estimate artiﬁcial “primary production
anomalies” may improve the ﬁt of our Ecosim model (Mackinson
et al., 2009; Araújo and Bundy, 2012; Bentley et al., 2019). The
application of this speciﬁc procedure to the Celtic Sea EwE
model provided an anomaly time-series signiﬁcantly correlated to
the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO) index. Nevertheless, these
developments were not included in this study as: (i) they did
not allow us to better reproduce patterns in plankton abundance
in the early years of the period 1985ñ2016; (ii) they may be
confounded with environmental factors that may improve, for
instance, ﬁsh recruitment; and (iii) they did not provide any
indications on the mechanisms at stake.
From Temporal and Spatial to a Fully Spatio-Temporal
Note that a novel spatio-temporal framework, that integrates
both temporal and spatial dimensions, has been developed by
Steenbeek et al. (2013) and included into the EwE software.
The present approach relies on the sequential development of
temporal rather than spatial food-web model and does not treat
both aspects simultaneously in the same framework. Thus, the
changes in functional group abundance predicted temporally
do not account for eventual mismatch between prey and
predators spatial distribution. The consequences on the overall
model predictions may remain limited here due to very limited
changes in the distribution of functional groups. However, such
novel version of Ecopath spatio-temporal framework should be
considered to predict long-term changes in the Celtic Sea in
a context of climate change, which would imply substantial
shifts in species distributions at various rates according to the
functional groups.
Spatial Patterns of Species Assemblages
and Trophic Functioning in the Celtic Sea
Heterogeneity in Biological Production Inﬂuenced by
Oceanography
The Ecospace model highlighted the heterogeneous spatial
patterns of biological production in the Celtic Sea that are mainly
driven by contrasting water mixing conditions over the study
region. In coastal areas, inner Bristol and English Channel, well-
mixed waters allow for early phytoplankton blooms in spring and
high primary production during the year depending on nutrient
inﬂux/recycling (Pingree et al., 1976; Pingree, 1980; Jordan and
Joint, 1984). The seasonally mixed waters spreading over the shelf
of the Celtic Sea lead to lower primary production, which occurs
later there and at a lower level than in coastal areas (Pingree, 1980;
Hickman et al., 2012; Giering et al., 2019). Note however, that
PP can be locally enhanced oﬀshore by the combined eﬀects of
topography and tidally-induced vertical mixing (through internal
waves at the shelf break; Sharples et al., 2007 and water current
shear stress in shallow waters of the shelf). The resulting shelf-
break front is well developed in South-West Celtic Sea and ﬁner
along the western shelf (Holligan and Groom, 1986; Druon et al.,
2001; Joint et al., 2001). In shallower waters, the Ushant front
(Pingree et al., 1982) occurs at the interface between the well-
mixed and stratiﬁed waters of the shelf from the Brittany tip
to the Western Channel while the Celtic Sea front (Simpson,
1976) lies between the Bristol Channel and the Irish Sea.
According to literature, the most productive areas, and especially
productivity fronts, were predicted to concentrate biomass over
several trophic levels up to top-predators (Pade et al., 2009;
Scales et al., 2014; Druon et al., 2019). Speciﬁc functional groups
inhabiting the water column displayed aggregated biomass at
their location such as mesozooplankton, mackerel and pelagic
sharks, as observed at the Ushant front. As about 80% (upwelling)
to 90% (oceanic waters) of the PP is transferred to detritus
(Raymont, 1980; Joint and Williams, 1985; Parker, 1991), spatial
patterns in PP would also aﬀect benthic compartments. The low
level of information on benthos in the present study however,
prevents any conclusions about these aspects.
The spatial structuration induced by primary production
was shown to propagate through the food web. However,
except for the above-mentioned functional groups, the spatial
contrast in productivity in the Celtic Sea generally dampens
with increasing trophic level. The mismatch between higher
trophic level species niche and highest primary productivity
areas is more important for predators than for prey. In other
words, trophic ﬂows progressively operate a biomass transfer
from restricted productive areas to lower productive areas in the
Celtic Sea. Biomass transfers across the shelf are mainly operated
through functional groups characterized by wide ecological
niches and large dispersal rates (one input parameter of Ecospace;
Romagnoni et al., 2015) such as medium pelagic species mackerel,
horse mackerel, pouts and large piscivorous predators in the
Celtic Sea. For such functional groups, Ecospace enables the
representation of locally enhanced biomass production due to
a higher availability of resources when accounting for dispersal
toward more suitable environments (Christensen et al., 2014).
Thus, through this modeling framework, we highlighted that
high ﬁsh densities could be maintained in low productive areas
of the Celtic Sea through subsidization by prey and predators
movements (Polis et al., 1997, 1996) and transport through
residual tidal currents.
Spatial Variation in Functional Groups Assemblages
In agreement with previous in situ studies, the functional groups’
distributions predicted by the Ecospace model highlighted the
existence of diﬀerent species assemblages in the Celtic Sea. The
species assemblages of the inner Bristol Channel and coastal areas
corresponded to those described by Ellis et al. (2000); Kaiser
et al. (2004) and Martinez et al. (2013), and these assemblages
included herring and sprat as dominant pelagic species, ﬂatﬁsh
[plaice, sole, dab (Limanda limanda)], gadoids whiting and pouts,
demersal sharks and rays (e.g., catshark Scyliorhinus canicula ,
rays Raja sp.), gurnards (Eutrigla sp.), small ﬁsh (e.g., dragonets
Callionymus sp.), large crustaceans (e.g., Maja squinado ) and
small crabs, pagurids and shrimps. The central Celtic Sea
assemblages identiﬁed in this study match those reported in Ellis
et al. (2013) and Martinez et al. (2013) and are characterized
by many gadoid species, including whiting, haddock, pouts and
cod, as well as by shrimps. As the present study, Ellis et al.
(2013) and Martinez et al. (2013) also characterized the demersal
assemblage of the Celtic Sea shelf-edge as being comprised of
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 17 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 18
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
hake, megrim, anglerﬁsh, pouts, mesopelagic species such as
Argentina sp ., and benthic cephalopods. The large abundances
of pelagic species such as mackerel, horse mackerel, boarﬁsh and
blue whiting on the Celtic Sea shelf-edge that were also predicted
in this study are consistent with the ﬁndings of Reid (2001)
and Trenkel et al. (2014).
In agreement with Rees (1999), we found that the Western
English Channel displays a particularly diverse benthic
assemblage that includes large crustaceans and commercial
bivalves [Kaiser et al., 1998; e.g., king scallop ( Pecten maximus),
queen scallop (Aequipecten opercularis)], as well as suprabenthos
(Vallet and Dauvin, 1998). The preponderant community of
pelagic species in the Western English Channel has been carefully
screened for decades (Southward et al., 1988; Hawkins et al.,
2003). The spatial patterns of abundance of most demersal
species predicted in this study were consistent with those derived
from English Celtic Sea groundﬁsh survey data (Warnes and
Jones, 1995; Tidd and Warnes, 2006), even though the latter were
not employed for statistical habitat modeling in this study.
Heterogeneous Species Assemblages Result in
Different Local Food Webs
The diﬀerent species assemblages of the Celtic Sea identiﬁed in
this study provided some new insights to the possible spatial
structure of the food web in the Celtic Sea region. While
some functional groups are widely distributed, some others
are only present in some speciﬁc areas of the Celtic Sea and
their absence or negligible biomass at particular locations may
be interpreted as reﬂecting local reorganizations of the food
web. Thus, the complex Celtic Sea food-web structure could be
interpreted as a meta food web made of local, environmentally-
driven, food webs connected through space by functional groups
with larger dispersion capacities (Kortsch et al., 2019, 2015).
Ecospace reveals to be a useful tool to understand the spatial
structure of food webs as a complement to more qualitative
approaches for characterizing the trophic structure of marine
ecosystems (Albouy et al., 2014; Pellissier et al., 2018; Kortsch
et al., 2019). Spatial indicators can be produced with Ecospace
to determine the spatial structure of the food web in relation
to the environment. Our results suggest that shallowest and
least saline (aﬀected by rivers) waters of the Celtic Sea, together
with the deepest waters of the region, are characterized by a
low number of compartments and groups with relatively low
variability in terms of TL. The two above-mentioned areas
are, however, radically diﬀerent in terms of functioning. The
latter is dominated by a speciﬁc trophic pathway where top-
predators (i.e., hake, megrim) in high density feed on abundant
pelagic species (i.e., blue whiting, boarﬁsh). The former, in deeper
environments, is essentially represented by low trophic level
benthic and pelagic functional groups with non-diversiﬁed diets.
The distinction made between the two areas does not exclude
the existence of important benthic-pelagic coupling in both areas,
but this coupling may be due to the reliance on pelagic primary
production rather than to exchanges between upper trophic level
species. Intermediate-depth areas of the Celtic Sea were found
to be dominated by pelagic functional groups, yet they displayed
large concentrations of benthopelagic ﬁsh feeding on the benthos
and pelagos. Finally, the central Celtic Sea was found to be
dominated by predatory and generalist functional groups that
feed on both pelagic and benthic compartments, which may
render this speciﬁc area more stable than the rest of the Celtic
Sea. Spatialized indicators highlighted that boundaries between
these diﬀerent areas constituted ecotones, characterized by higher
functional group and trophic diversity as they suited to a wider
range of species.
The Limited Perception of the Mean
Annually-Averaged Ecosystem Functioning
The spatio-temporal dynamic model of this study represents
the trophic functioning of the Celtic Sea ecosystem averaged
over a year. We proceeded this way because of data availability
for model calibration (i.e., survey-derived abundance indices,
stock assessment products, and catch statistics). Averaging
trophic interactions can be questionable, as trophic functioning
over the year is strongly related to seasonal variations in
plankton production. These variations are mainly associated
with hydrographic features and water mixing processes. In
addition, seasonal movements, and subsequent changes in spatial
distributions and local abundances have been highlighted for
both pelagic [widely distributed pelagic ﬁsh (Trenkel et al., 2014)
and coastal to a lower degree (Brophy, 2002)] and demersal
communities (Dunn and Pawson, 2002; Persohn et al., 2009; Neat
et al., 2014). These movements can notably be related to feeding,
spawning and overwintering.
Seasonal changes in distributions would explain the variability
of ﬁsh diets in the Celtic Sea reported in Trenkel et al.
(2005) and Chassot et al. (2008). For instance, large Celtic Sea
predators consume more blue whiting during the summer and
more mackerel during the winter, whereas the consumption
of horse mackerel is relatively constant throughout the year.
However, modeling changes in ﬁsh spatial distributions at a ﬁner
temporal scale remains a challenging issue given the data that are
available to us.
More Insights Into the Dynamic of a Shelf
Ecosystem Under Multiple
Environmental and Anthropogenic
Pressures
The Celtic Sea Ecosim model best explained the food-web
dynamics when it integrated trophic interactions, ﬁshing,
environmental conditions controlling plankton production, and
warming as a driver of the productivity of higher trophic level
groups. The way the Ecosim model ﬁtted to data when diﬀerent
data types were integrated provided a better understanding of
the relative impacts of ﬁshing and environmental changes on the
Celtic Sea ecosystem during the three last decades.
Fishing on the Frontline
Previous work based on catch and eﬀort reconstruction
highlighted the large impacts that ﬁshing has had on the Celtic
Sea ecosystem since 1950 (Pinnegar et al., 2002; Guénette and
Gascuel, 2012; Hernvann and Gascuel, 2020). In particular, the
dramatic increase in ﬁshing pressure that has occurred in the
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 18 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 19
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
Celtic Sea region over several decades may have drastically
reduced the biomass of large predators and may have triggered
the deep alteration of the food-web structure through trophic
cascades (Hernvann and Gascuel, 2020). The impacts of ﬁshing
in the Celtic Sea ecosystem suggested by the present study concur
with the conclusions of previous EwE modeling works in the
ecosystem by Bentorcha et al. (2017) and Moullec et al. (2017).
At the beginning of our study period, in 1985, the biomass of
main large bentho-demersal ﬁsh and predator species had already
been severely impacted by ﬁshing and pelagic and invertebrate
ﬁsheries started developing in the Celtic Sea region. Then,
between 1985 and 2016, ﬁshing kept on severely impacting the
Celtic Sea ecosystem. Despite the integration of environmental
variability in the Ecosim model, our ﬁndings suggest that ﬁshing
had more profound impacts on the Celtic Sea ecosystem than
environmental changes.
Compared to previous versions of the Celtic Sea EwE model,
the present Ecosim predictions were more accurate due to the use
of new survey data (EVHOE and UK-WCGFS) which allowed
for a better description of the indirect eﬀects of ﬁshing in the
Celtic Sea EwE model. The divergent abundance time-series for
smaller and larger ﬁsh groups, which increased and decreased,
respectively, over the period 1985ñ2016, were better identiﬁed in
this study than in the studies that employed previous versions of
the Celtic Sea EwE model. The analysis of the mortality estimates
suggested that the driving factor of trends in mortality was
predation release on smaller species, due to both the continuously
increasing pressure exerted on large predatory ﬁsh and the
reallocation of ﬁshing eﬀort on medium ﬁsh in response to
the depletion of to large predators. These results concur with
the hypotheses formulated in community size-structure studies
(Blanchard et al., 2005; Shephard et al., 2012, 2011). Though this
phenomenon was only described for demersal species, the large
decline in the biomass of horse mackerel in the beginning of the
1990s predicted in this study (a 6-fold decline within only a 10-
year time frame resulting from a large increase in ﬁshing eﬀort
on horse mackerel) may have also contributed to the increasing
biomass of smaller species. This may probably be the case (horse
mackerel leaving a vacant niche) for other small pelagic species,
such as boarﬁsh to boom in the early 2000s, as observed by
Blanchard and Vandermeirsch (2005) and Coad (2012) and also
correlated to changes in the temperature. Thus, ﬁshing appears
as the main driver of changes in species assemblages in the Celtic
Sea, especially leading to a decrease in the diversity of diets and a
general decline in the mean trophic level in the area.
Finally, the biomass recoveries initiated in the Celtic Sea
over the recent period were particularly noticeable, and these
biomass recoveries seemed to allow for a progressively increasing
dominance of demersal species in the Celtic Sea ecosystem and
a rise of the predation pressure exerted on smaller demersal
ﬁsh, crustaceans, and cephalopods as highlighted by the biomass
decline of the latter and the increase in the HTI index.
Climate Change in Ambush
The importance of the ﬁshing driver in the Celtic Sea contributed
to mask the impacts of environmental changes on the ecosystem.
Indeed, many abundance trends of exploited groups reﬂected
stock depletions and recoveries independently of warming eﬀects.
The dominance of the ﬁshing driver in observed time series is
consistent with the lack of evidence of any warming eﬀect in
the Celtic Sea from studies that analyzed species biomass trends
or community size-structure (Genner et al., 2004; Blanchard
et al., 2005). However, through the use of GAM predictions
and temperature forcing, we were able to account for the
cumulative impacts of ﬁshing and environment changes in EwE
and to disentangle the relative contributions of these diﬀerent
drivers of change. The mid-1990s were characterized by a
net warming of the Atlantic Ocean that was attributed to a
shift of the Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO) from a
negative to a positive phase, which was likely ampliﬁed by
anthropogenic climate change (Ting et al., 2009). As a response
to this large-scale warming events, both sea surface and bottom
temperatures in the Celtic Sea increased. The Celtic Sea EwE
with Ecospace model suggests that these temperature changes
led to a decrease in the productivity of most of Boreal species,
including herring, sprat, cod, whiting and haddock, and to an
increase in the productivity of functional groups with warm water
aﬃnity, particularly species with extreme thermal preferenda
such as sardine, sea bass, mixed medium pelagic ﬁsh [mainly
anchovy ( Engraulis encrasicolus )] and cephalopods, and to a
lesser extent, widely distributed pelagic species such as mackerel,
horse mackerel and boarﬁsh. In future years, these trends in
species productivity may impair the recovery of some current
commercially important species (i.e., gadoids) and oblige ﬁshers
to target less exploited warm-water species. Additionally, the
species distributions predicted by Ecospace indicated a relative
concentration of Boreal species’ biomasses in a smaller area
around the mid-1990s. This modiﬁcation of Boreal functional
groups’ distributions persisted until the end of the study period
and resulted from a contraction of these groups’ niches induced
by warming. If the scale of these changes was limited, it conﬁrmed
the response of these species to climate change, which was barely
detectable in temporal trends. The niche contraction of demersal
Boreal species in the south of the Celtic Sea was associated to
an increase in functional groups diversity, related to the largest
proportion of biomass represented by species with warmer water
aﬃnities. The latter, the trophic diversity declined in response
to change in assemblage, being mainly benthivorous and of
low trophic level.
These responses of functional groups’ productivity and
distribution to ocean warming predicted in this study were
consistent with the ﬁndings of multiple ﬁsh community studies
that were conducted across Europe for a large proportion of
both demersal and pelagic species. In such studies, species were
shown to respond to warming in the 1990s (Simpson et al., 2011;
Montero-Serra et al., 2015). Changes were mostly correlated
to species’ preferred temperature and central latitude of their
range so that the abundance or recruitment of cold water species
decreased while that of warm water, widely distributed species
increased (Poulard and Blanchard, 2005; Simpson et al., 2011;
Auber et al., 2017, 2015; Bentley et al., 2020). If no homogeneous
poleward shifts of the communities were highlighted over the
European shelf (Dulvy et al., 2008; Simpson et al., 2011), the
spatial distribution of numerous species was aﬀected by warming
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 19 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 20
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
(Baudron et al., 2020), some displaying displacements of their
center of distribution and others showing migration to deeper
waters (Dulvy et al., 2008; Punzón et al., 2016). The potential
changes in the distribution of species located south of the Celtic
Sea or already present in low abundance in the Celtic Sea are
responsible for the increase in species diversity observed by
Hiddink and ter Hofstede (2008) and ter Hofstede et al. (2010).
The Relative Stability of the Celtic Sea Ecosystem
When spatializing ﬁsh communities’ responses to warming over
the European shelf, Simpson et al. (2011) pointed out that the
Celtic Sea was less impacted than the neighboring areas. This
result may be linked to the lower variability of Celtic Sea thermal
conditions after the mid-1990s that resulted from the particular
hydrographic situation of the Celtic Sea (i.e., Gulf Stream
inﬂuence, Hughes et al., 2017; Tinker et al., 2020). However,
the amplitude of warming in the mid-1990s suggested that local
thermal conditions were not the only reason for the weaker
response of the Celtic Sea ecosystem to warming compared
to neighboring ecosystems. Ecospace results suggest that the
greater stability of Celtic Sea communities may be due to the
complex spatial structuration and high biodiversity of the Celtic
Sea ecosystem. According to various theoretical and modeling
studies, the meta-community organization of food webs may act
as a stabilizer of trophic dynamics (McCann et al., 2005; Gravel
et al., 2011; Mougi and Kondoh, 2016). The spatial arrangement
of environmental gradients in the Celtic Sea is complex compared
to other ecosystems where gradients are more correlated together
(e.g., the Bay of Biscay, the North Sea). Additionally, though
they are developed from collated data from multiple origins,
harmonized seabed maps at the European scale indicate that
substrate patchiness is higher than in neighboring ecosystems
(e.g., the North Sea, the Eastern English Channel). The spatial
structuration of the Celtic Sea ecosystem may favor a stable
meta-community organization and allow for more resistance
to the impacts of environmental changes. The complex spatial
structure of the Celtic Sea may also reduce the probability of
co-occurrence of “autochtonous” and a “allochtonous” species in
the ecosystem, hence lowering the risks of competition between
these two types of species if they have similar trophic niches.
Finally, the substantial contribution of both benthic and pelagic
pathways to matter ﬂows in the Celtic Sea ecosystem may also
participate in the stability of the ecosystem (Rooney et al., 2006;
Blanchard et al., 2011).
We also found that the Celtic Sea is relatively stable in terms
of basal productivity. As reﬂected by biogeochemical models
and satellite-derived time-series, the oceanographic conditions
favoring phytoplankton and zooplankton abundances over the
study period remained overall constant. This may be due to the
mechanisms involved in the production of mesoscale structures
in the Celtic Sea that favor plankton production. Indeed, a
substantial part of total primary production in the Celtic Sea
is due to the tidally-induced semi-permanent mixing fronts
that occur in the central part of the eastern Celtic shelf, i.e.,
the Ushant Front and the Celtic Sea Front. Contrary to other
ecosystems in which productivity fronts are largely dependent
on climatic conditions, tidal mixing fronts in the Celtic Sea
can form simply under the mechanical action of wave activity,
resulting in a more regular production in the Celtic Sea region,
which is consistent with the production of mesozooplankton
(Druon et al., 2019).
A Step Further Toward
Ecosystem-Based Management?
This new EwE with Ecospace model of the Celtic Sea ecosystem
represents a signiﬁcant step forward in the integration of
ecological realism in trophic modeling of the Celtic Sea ecosystem
(Guénette and Gascuel, 2009; Bentorcha et al., 2017; Moullec
et al., 2017). In the Celtic Sea, highly mixed-species ﬁsheries
catch a large diversity of ﬁsh assemblages and employ a large
diversity of ﬁshing techniques and strategies (Moore et al., 2019)
that can result in highly diﬀerent catch compositions for the
same location over time (Martinez et al., 2013; Dolder et al.,
2018). In this context, resource mapping and optimization of
ﬁshing practices in time and space have been identiﬁed as a
critical need to reduce the ecosystem impacts of ﬁshing in the
Celtic Sea, e.g., by reducing unwanted catch (Dolder et al.,
2018; Calderwood et al., 2019; Reid et al., 2019; Robert et al.,
2019). The Celtic Sea Ecospace model reproduced the patterns
observed during ﬁsheries-independent surveys but also clearly
identiﬁed the spatial structuration and species assemblages that
were identiﬁed in some spatial studies of ﬁsheries catch, based on
logbooks and vessel monitoring systems (Gerritsen et al., 2012;
Mateo et al., 2017).
The EwE with Ecospace model developed in this study
represents a valuable tool for the spatial management of ﬁshing
activities in the Celtic Sea. In future studies, the Celtic Sea
Ecospace model could be employed to produce multiple spatial
food-web indicators to describe ecosystem status as part of
ecosystem-based management (Tam et al., 2017), or to identify
critical areas of the Celtic Sea in terms of diversity and
functionalities (Babcock et al., 2005). As other ecosystem models,
our EwE with Ecospace model could be also used to inform spatial
zoning in the Celtic Sea (e.g., Kaplan et al., 2012; Abdou et al.,
2016; Halouani et al., 2016) and other management regulations
(e.g., relative to discarding practices, Pennino et al., 2020). Such
framework can therefore provide great support to policies such
as the Common Fisheries Policy (e.g., spatial ﬁshing capacities)
and the Marine Strategy Framework Directive (e.g., descriptor
D3 commercially exploited ﬁsh, D4 food webs, e.g., Piroddi et al.,
2015; Piroddi et al., submitted).
Although ﬁshing appeared to be the main driver of changes
in the Celtic Sea ecosystem over the three last decades, this
may likely not be the case anymore in the future. While ﬁshing
pressure in the Celtic Sea region has been substantially reduced
over the recent years and is still currently (slowly) declining,
the relative stability of environmental conditions observed over
the last two decades may likely not hold; projections of coupled
physical and biogeochemical models under various CO2 emission
scenarios predict a global increase in surface and bottom
temperatures and a decline in primary production in the Celtic
Sea ecosystem (Kay et al., 2018). In this context, similarly
to previous temporal or spatio-temporal ecosystem modeling
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 20 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 21
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
studies (Serpetti et al., 2017; Corrales et al., 2018; Moullec et al.,
2019a), the calibrated the Celtic Sea Ecospace model would be a
powerful tool to project the potential impacts of climate change
on the regional living resources and the ﬁsheries that these
resources support.
DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/ Supplementary Material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author. The Celtic Sea Ecopath
model at the core of this study can be accessed from EcoBase,
the open-access database of Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) models
published worldwide in the scientﬁc literature. EcoBase is an
information repository of EwE models freely accessible online at
http://ecobase.ecopath.org/ or via the EwE software.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
P-YH designed the study, performed the main statistical analyses,
and built and ran the ecosystem model. P-YH, J-ND, MR, DG,
and IP provided and gathered the data used in the study. AG,
J-ND, CP , and DG helped to and participated in designing
and applying the habitat and trophic modeling approaches
integrated in the present modeling framework. DG, MR, and DK
contributed to the design of the integrated modeling framework.
DG, MR, DK, AG, J-ND, CP , and IP contributed to results
analysis and interpretation. This work was part of a Ph.D. project
designed by DG, MR, and DK. P-YH led the drafting of the
manuscript with the contributions and revisions from all the
authors. All authors contributed to the article and approved the
submitted version.
FUNDING
This work was part of a Ph.D. funded by the Région
Bretagne and the French Institute for the Exploitation of the Sea
(IFREMER). The temporary stay of the principal investigator at
the Joint Research Center of the European Commission as part
of this research project was funded by an international mobility
grant from IFREMER.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We are particularly grateful to the Joint Research Center of the
European Commission who hosted the main investigator during
his international mobility. We thank the CPR survey and David
Jones for providing access to the plankton data. We also thank
Dr. John Pinnegar (CEFAS) and Dr. Verena Trenkel (IFREMER)
for access to the UK-WCGFS survey data.
SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmars.
2020.578717/full#supplementary-material
REFERENCES
Abdou, K., Halouani, G., Hattab, T., Romdhane, M. S., Frida Ben, and Le Loc’h,
F. (2016). Exploring the potential eﬀects of marine protected areas on the
ecosystem structure of the Gulf of Gabes using the Ecospace model. Aquat.
Living Resour. 29:202. doi: 10.1051/alr/2016014
Agnetta, D., Badalamenti, F., Colloca, F., D’Anna, G., Di Lorenzo, M.,
Fiorentino, F., et al. (2019). Benthic-pelagic coupling mediates interactions in
Mediterranean mixed ﬁsheries: an ecosystem modeling approach. PLoS One
14:e0210659. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210659
Ahrens, R. N. M., Walters, C. J., and Christensen, V. (2012). Foraging arena
theory: foraging arena theory. Fish Fish. 13, 41ñ59. doi: 10.1111/j.1467-2979.
2011.00432.x
Ainsworth, C., and Pitcher, T. (2006). Modifying Kempton’s species diversity index
for use with ecosystem simulation models. Ecol. Indic. 6, 623ñ630. doi: 10.1016/
j.ecolind.2005.08.024
Akaike, H. (1974). A new look at the statistical model identiﬁcation. IEEE Trans.
Automatic Control 19, 716ñ723. doi: 10.1109/TAC.1974.1100705
Albouy, C., Velez, L., Coll, M., Colloca, F., Le Loc’h, F., Mouillot, D., et al.
(2014). From projected species distribution to food-web structure under climate
change. Glob. Change Biol. 20, 730ñ741. doi: 10.1111/gcb.12467
Araújo, J., and Bundy, A. (2012). Eﬀects of environmental change, ﬁsheries and
trophodynamics on the ecosystem of the western Scotian Shelf, Canada. Mar.
Ecol. Prog. Ser. 464, 51ñ67. doi: 10.3354/meps09792
Auber, A., Gohin, F., Goascoz, N., and Schlaich, I. (2017). Decline of cold-water
ﬁsh species in the Bay of Somme (English Channel, France) in response to
ocean warming. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 189, 189ñ202. doi: 10.1016/j.ecss.2017.
03.010
Auber, A., Travers-Trolet, M., Villanueva, M. C., and Ernande, B. (2015).
Regime shift in an exploited ﬁsh community related to natural
climate oscillations. PLoS One 10:e0129883. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0
129883
Audzijonyte, A., Pethybridge, H., Porobic, J., Gorton, R., Kaplan, I., and Fulton,
E. A. (2019). Atlantis: a spatially explicit end-to-end marine ecosystem model
with dynamically integrated physics, ecology and socio-economic modules.
Methods Ecol. Evol. 10, 1814ñ1819. doi: 10.1111/2041-210X.13272
Babcock, E. A., Pikitch, E. K., McAllister, M. K., Apostolaki, P., and Santora, C.
(2005). A perspective on the use of spatialized indicators for ecosystem-based
ﬁshery management through spatial zoning. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62, 469ñ476.
doi: 10.1016/j.icesjms.2005.01.010
Baretta, J. W., Ebenhöh, W., and Ruardij, P. (1995). The European regional seas
ecosystem model, a complex marine ecosystem model. Neth. J. Sea Res. 33,
233ñ246. doi: 10.1016/0077-7579(95)90047-0
Barnett, A., and Semmens, J. M. (2012). Sequential movement into coastal
habitats and high spatial overlap of predator and prey suggest high predation
pressure in protected areas. Oikos 121, 882ñ890. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0706.2011.
20000.x
Baudron, A. R., Brunel, T., Blanchet, M., Hidalgo, M., Chust, G., Brown, E. J.,
et al. (2020). Changing ﬁsh distributions challenge the eﬀective management
of European ﬁsheries. Ecography 43, 494ñ505. doi: 10.1111/ecog.04864
Beaugrand, G., Ibañez, F., and Reid, P. (2000). Spatial, seasonal and long-term
ﬂuctuations of plankton in relation to hydroclimatic features in the English
Channel, Celtic Sea and Bay of Biscay. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 200, 93ñ102. doi:
10.3354/meps200093
Behrenfeld, M. J., and Falkowski, P. G. (1997). Photosynthetic rates derived from
satellite-based chlorophyll concentration. Limnol. Oceanogr. 42, 1ñ20. doi: 10.
4319/lo.1997.42.1.0001
Bentley, J., Serpetti, N., Fox, C. J., Reid, D. G., and Heymans, J. J. (2019).
Modelling the Food Web in the Irish Sea in the Context of a Depleted
Commercial Fish Community. Part 2: ICES Ecopath with Ecosim Key Run .
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 21 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 22
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
Oban: Scottish Association for Marine Science. doi: 10.13140/RG.2.2.15136.
12809
Bentley, J. W., Serpetti, N., Fox, C. J., Heymans, J. J., and Reid, D. G. (2020).
Retrospective analysis of the inﬂuence of environmental drivers on commercial
stocks and ﬁshing opportunities in the Irish Sea. Fish. Oceanogr. 29, 415ñ435.
doi: 10.1111/fog.12486
Bentley, J. W., Serpetti, N., and Heymans, J. J. (2017). Investigating the potential
impacts of ocean warming on the Norwegian and Barents Seas ecosystem using
a time-dynamic food-web model. Ecol. Model. 360, 94ñ107. doi: 10.1016/j.
ecolmodel.2017.07.002
Bentorcha, A., Gascuel, D., and Guénette, S. (2017). Using trophic models to assess
the impact of ﬁshing in the Bay of Biscay and the Celtic Sea. Aquat. Living
Resour. 30:7. doi: 10.1051/alr/2017006
Blanchard, F., and Vandermeirsch, F. (2005). Warming and exponential abundance
increase of the subtropical ﬁsh Capros aper in the Bay of Biscay (1973ñ2002).
C. R. Biol. 328, 505ñ509. doi: 10.1016/j.crvi.2004.12.006
Blanchard, J. L., Dulvy, N. K., Jennings, S., Ellis, J. R., Pinnegar, J. K., Tidd, A.,
et al. (2005). Do climate and ﬁshing inﬂuence size-based indicators of Celtic Sea
ﬁsh community structure? ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62, 405ñ411. doi: 10.1016/j.icesjms.
2005.01.006
Blanchard, J. L., Law, R., Castle, M. D., and Jennings, S. (2011). Coupled energy
pathways and the resilience of size-structured food webs. Theor. Ecol. 4, 289ñ
300. doi: 10.1007/s12080-010-0078-9
Bourdaud, P., Gascuel, D., Bentorcha, A., and Brind’Amour, A. (2016). New
trophic indicators and target values for an ecosystem-based management
of ﬁsheries. Ecol. Indic. 61(Part 2), 588ñ601. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.
10.010
Brophy, D. (2002). Tracing populations of Atlantic herring (Clupea harengus L.)
in the Irish and Celtic Seas using otolith microstructure. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 59,
1305ñ1313. doi: 10.1006/jmsc.2002.1304
Brunel, T., and Boucher, J. (2007). Long-term trends in ﬁsh recruitment in the
north-east Atlantic related to climate change. Fish. Oceanogr. 116: 16, 336ñ349.
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2419.2007.00435.x
Calderwood, J., Robert, M., Pawlowski, L., Vermard, Y., Radford, Z., Catchpole,
T. L., et al. (2019). Hotspot mapping in the Celtic Sea: an interactive tool
using multinational data to optimise ﬁshing practices. Mar. Policy 116: 103511.
doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2019.103511
Chase, J. M., and Leibold, M. A. (2003). Ecological Niches: Linking Classical and
Contemporary Approaches, Interspeciﬁc Interactions . Chicago, IL: University of
Chicago Press.
Chassot, E., Bonhommeau, S., Reygondeau, G., Nieto, K., Polovina, J. J., Huret,
M., et al. (2011). Satellite remote sensing for an ecosystem approach to
ﬁsheries management. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68, 651ñ666. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/
fsq195
Chassot, E., Rouyer, T., Trenkel, V. M., and Gascuel, D. (2008). Investigating
trophic-level variability in Celtic Sea ﬁsh predators. J. Fish Biol. 73, 763ñ781.
doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2008.01938.x
Christensen, V., Coll, M., Steenbeek, J., Buszowski, J., Chagaris, D., and Walters,
C. J. (2014). Representing variable habitat quality in a spatial food web model.
Ecosystems 17, 1397ñ1412. doi: 10.1007/s10021-014-9803-3
Christensen, V., and Walters, C. J. (2004). Ecopath with Ecosim: methods,
capabilities and limitations. Ecol. Model. 172, 109ñ139. doi: 10.1016/j.
ecolmodel.2003.09.003
Christensen, V., Walters, C. J., Ahrens, R., Alder, J., Buszowski, J., Christensen,
L. B., et al. (2009). Database-driven models of the world’s large marine
ecosystems. Ecol. Model. 220, 1984ñ1996. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2009.04.041
Christensen, V., Walters, C. J., and Pauly, D. (2008). Ecopath with Ecosim version 6
user guide. Lenfest Ocean Futures Project 2008. Vancouver: University of British
Columbia.
Citores, L., Ibaibarriaga, L., Lee, D.-J., Brewer, M. J., Santos, M., and Chust,
G. (2020). Modelling species presenceñabsence in the ecological niche theory
framework using shape-constrained generalized additive models. Ecol. Model.
418:108926. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2019.108926
Coad, J. O. (2012). Boom in Boarﬁsh Abundance: Insight from Otolith Analysis .
Available online at: http://ices.dk/products/CMdocs/CM-2012/J/J1012.pdf
Coll, M., Pennino, M. G., Steenbeek, J., Sole, J., and Bellido, J. M. (2019).
Predicting marine species distributions: complementarity of food-web and
Bayesian hierarchical modelling approaches. Ecol. Model. 405, 86ñ101. doi:
10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2019.05.005
Coll, M., and Steenbeek, J. (2017). Standardized ecological indicators to assess
aquatic food webs: the ECOIND software plug-in for Ecopath with Ecosim
models. Environ. Model. Softw. 89, 120ñ130. doi: 10.1016/j.envsoft.2016.12.004
Coll, M., Steenbeek, J., Sole, J., Palomera, I., and Christensen, V. (2016). Modelling
the cumulative spatialñtemporal eﬀects of environmental drivers and ﬁshing
in a NW Mediterranean marine ecosystem. Ecol. Model. 331, 100ñ114. doi:
10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2016.03.020
Corrales, X., Coll, M., Oﬁr, E., Heymans, J. J., Steenbeek, J., Goren, M., et al. (2018).
Future scenarios of marine resources and ecosystem conditions in the Eastern
Mediterranean under the impacts of ﬁshing, alien species and sea warming. Sci.
Rep. 8:14284. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-32666-x
Cronne, L. (2016). SISP 15 - manual of the IBTS North Eastern Atlantic surveys.
Ser. ICES Surv. Protoc. SISP 15:92. doi: 10.17895/ices.pub.3519
Dahood, A., Watters, G. M., and de Mutsert, K. (2019). Using sea-ice to calibrate
a dynamic trophic model for the Western Antarctic Peninsula. PLoS One
14:e0214814. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0214814
Day, L., Kopp, D., Robert, M., and Le Bris, H. (2019). Trophic ecology of large
gadiforms in the food web of a continental shelf ecosystem. Prog. Oceanogr.
175, 105ñ114. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2019.03.007
Dinter, W. P. (2001). Biogeography of the OSPAR Maritime Area: A Synopsis and
Synthesis of Biogeographical Distribution Patterns Described for the North East
Atlantic. Bonn: Federal Agency for Nature Conservation.
Dolder, P. J., Thorson, J. T., and Minto, C. (2018). Spatial separation of catches in
highly mixed ﬁsheries. Sci. Rep. 8:13886. doi: 10.1038/s41598-018-31881-w
Druon, J.-N., Hélaouët, P., Beaugrand, G., Fromentin, J.-M., Palialexis,
A., and Hoepﬀner, N. (2019). Satellite-based indicator of zooplankton
distribution for global monitoring. Sci. Rep. 9:4732. doi: 10.1038/s41598-019-41
212-2
Druon, J. N., Langlois, G., and Le Fèvre, J. (2001). Simulating vertical mixing in
a shelf-break region: addition of a shear instability model, accounting for the
overall eﬀect of internal tides, on top of a one-dimensional turbulence closure
mixed layer model. Cont. Shelf Res. 21, 423ñ454. doi: 10.1016/S0278-4343(00)
00090-X
Duhamel, E., Pawlowski, L., and Garren, F. (2018). EVHOE 2018 cruise,Thalassa
R/V. Available online at: https://campagnes.ﬂotteoceanographique.fr/
campagnes/18000518/ (accessed July 1, 2020).
Dulvy, N. K., Rogers, S. I., Jennings, S., Stelzenmller, V., Dye, S. R., and Skjoldal,
H. R. (2008). Climate change and deepening of the North Sea ﬁsh assemblage:
a biotic indicator of warming seas. J. Appl. Ecol. 45, 1029ñ1039. doi: 10.1111/j.
1365-2664.2008.01488.x
Dunn, M. R., and Pawson, M. G. (2002). The stock structure and migrations of
plaice populations on the west coast of England and Wales. J. Fish Biol. 61,
360ñ393. doi: 10.1111/j.1095-8649.2002.tb01571.x
Edwards, K. P., Barciela, R., and Butenschön, M. (2012). Validation of the
NEMO-ERSEM operational ecosystem model for the North West European
Continental Shelf. Ocean Sci. 8, 983ñ1000. doi: 10.5194/os-8-983-2012
Ellis, J. R., Lancaster, J. E., Cadman, P. S., and Rogers, S. I. (2002). “The marine
fauna of the Celtic Sea, ” inMarine Biodiversity in Ireland and Adjacent Waters,
ed. J. D. Nuun (Belfasts: Ulster Museum), 45ñ46.
Ellis, J. R., Martinez, I., Burt, G. J., and Scott, B. E. (2013). Epibenthic assemblages
in the Celtic Sea and associated with the Jones Bank.Prog. Oceanogr. 117, 76ñ88.
doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2013.06.012
Ellis, J. R., Rogers, S. I., and Freeman, S. M. (2000). Demersal Assemblages in the
Irish Sea, St George’s Channel and Bristol Channel. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 51,
299ñ315. doi: 10.1006/ecss.2000.0677
Farmer, N. A., and Karnauskas, M. (2013). Spatial distribution and conservation of
speckled hind and warsaw grouper in the Atlantic Ocean oﬀ the southeastern
US. PloS one, 8:e78682. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078682
Fulton, E. A., Parslow, J. S., Smith, A. D. M., and Johnson, C. R. (2004).
Biogeochemical marine ecosystem models II: the eﬀect of physiological detail
on model performance. Ecol. Model. 173, 371ñ406. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.
2003.09.024
Gardner, M. B. (1981). Eﬀects of turbidity on feeding rates and selectivity of
bluegills. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 110, 446ñ450. doi: 10.1577/1548-8659(1981)
110<446:eotofr>2.0.co;2
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 22 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 23
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
Gascuel, D., Coll, M., Fox, C., Guénette, S., Guitton, J., Kenny, A., et al. (2016).
Fishing impact and environmental status in European seas: a diagnosis from
stock assessments and ecosystem indicators. Fish Fish. 17, 31ñ55. doi: 10.1111/
faf.12090
Genner, M. J., Sims, D. W., Wearmouth, V. J., Southall, E. J., Southward, A. J.,
Henderson, P. A., et al. (2004). Regional climatic warming drives longñterm
community changes of British marine ﬁsh. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. Ser. B Biol. Sci.
271, 655ñ661. doi: 10.1098/rspb.2003.2651
Gerritsen, H. D., Lordan, C., Minto, C., and Kraak, S. B. M. (2012). Spatial
patterns in the retained catch composition of Irish demersal otter trawlers: high-
resolution ﬁsheries data as a management tool. Fish. Res. 129ñ130, 127ñ136.
doi: 10.1016/j.ﬁshres.2012.06.019
Giering, S. L. C., Wells, S. R., Mayers, K. M. J., Schuster, H., Cornwell, L.,
Fileman, E. S., et al. (2019). Seasonal variation of zooplankton community
structure and trophic position in the Celtic Sea: a stable isotope and biovolume
spectrum approach. Prog. Oceanogr. 177:101943. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2018.
03.012
Giraldo, C., Ernande, B., Cresson, P., Kopp, D., Cachera, M., Travers-Trolet,
M., et al. (2017). Depth gradient in the resource use of a ﬁsh community
from a semi-enclosed sea. Limnol. Oceanogr. 62, 2213ñ2226. doi: 10.1002/lno.
10561
Gravel, D., Canard, E., Guichard, F., and Mouquet, N. (2011). Persistence
increases with diversity and connectance in trophic metacommunities. PLoS
One 6:e19374. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019374
Grüss, A., Babcock, E. A., Sagarese, S. R., Drexler, M., Chagaris, D. D., Ainsworth,
C. H., et al. (2016). Improving the spatial allocation of functional group
biomasses in spatially-explicit ecosystem models: insights from three Gulf
of Mexico models. Bull. Mar. Sci. 92, 473ñ496. doi: 10.5343/bms.2016.
1057
Grüss, A., Chagaris, D. D., Babcock, E. A., and Tarnecki, J. H. (2018). Assisting
ecosystem-based ﬁsheries management eﬀorts using a comprehensive survey
database, a large environmental database, and generalized additive models.
Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 10, 40ñ70. doi: 10.1002/mcf2.10002
Grüss, A., Rose, K. A., Justiæ, D., and Wang, L. (2020). Making the most of available
monitoring data: a grid-summarization method to allow for the combined use
of monitoring data collected at random and ﬁxed sampling stations. Fish. Res.
229:105623. doi: 10.1016/j.ﬁshres.2020.105623
Guénette, S., and Gascuel, D. (2009). “Considering Both Fishing and Climate in a
model of the Celtic Sea and the Bay of Biscay: what do we learn?” inProceedings
of the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea, Annual Science
Conference, Berlin.
Guénette, S., and Gascuel, D. (2012). Shifting baselines in European ﬁsheries: the
case of the Celtic Sea and Bay of Biscay. Ocean Coast. Manage . 70, 10ñ21.
doi: 10.1016/j.ocecoaman.2012.06.010
Halouani, G., Ben Rais, Lasram, F., Shin, Y.-J., Velez, L., Verley, P., et al. (2016).
Modelling food web structure using an end-to-end approach in the coastal
ecosystem of the Gulf of Gabes (Tunisia).Ecol. Model. 339, 45ñ57. doi: 10.1016/
j.ecolmodel.2016.08.008
Hansson, S. (1984). Competition as a Factor Regulating the Geographical
Distribution of Fish Species in a Baltic Archipelago: a neutral model analysis.
J. Biogeogr. 11, 367ñ381. doi: 10.2307/2844802
Hawkins, S. J., Southward, A. J., and Genner, M. J. (2003). Detection of
environmental change in a marine ecosystemóevidence from the western
English Channel. Sci. Total Environ. Detect. Environ. Change 310, 245ñ256.
doi: 10.1016/S0048-9697(02)00645-9
Hernvann, P.-Y., and Gascuel, D. (2020). Exploring the impacts of ﬁshing and
environment on the Celtic Sea ecosystem since 1950. Fish. Res. 225:105472.
doi: 10.1016/j.ﬁshres.2019.105472
Heymans, J. J., Coll, M., Link, J. S., Mackinson, S., Steenbeek, J., Walters, C., et al.
(2016). Best practice in Ecopath with Ecosim food-web models for ecosystem-
based management. Ecol. Model. 331, 173ñ184. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2015.
12.007
Hickman, A., Moore, C., Sharples, J., Lucas, M., Tilstone, G., Krivtsov, V., et al.
(2012). Primary production and nitrate uptake within the seasonal thermocline
of a stratiﬁed shelf sea. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.463, 39ñ57. doi: 10.3354/meps09836
Hiddink, J. G., and ter Hofstede, R. (2008). Climate induced increases in species
richness of marine ﬁshes. Glob. Change Biol. 14, 453ñ460. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2486.2007.01518.x
Holligan, P. M., and Groom, S. B. (1986). Phytoplankton distributions along the
shelf break. Proc. R. Soc. Edinb. Sect. B Biol. Sci. 88, 239ñ263. doi: 10.1017/
S0269727000004589
Holling, C. S. (1959). The components of predation as revealed by a study of small-
mammal predation of the european pine sawﬂy. Can. Entomol. 91, 293ñ320.
doi: 10.4039/Ent91293-5
Hughes, S. L., Tinker, J., and Dye, S. (2017). Temperature. MCCIP Science Review
2017. MCCIP Science Review 2017 . 22ñ41. Available online at: http://www.
mccip.org.uk/media/1750/2017arc_sciencereview_003_tem.pdf (accessed July
1, 2020).
Hunsicker, M. E., Ciannelli, L., Bailey, K. M., Buckel, J. A., Wilson White, J., Link,
J. S., et al. (2011). Functional responses and scaling in predator-prey interactions
of marine ﬁshes: contemporary issues and emerging concepts. Ecol. Lett. 14,
1288ñ1299. doi: 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2011.01696.x
Hutchinson, G. E. (1957). Concluding Remarks. Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant.
Biol. 22, 415ñ427. doi: 10.1101/SQB.1957.022.01.039
Huxel, G. R., and McCann, K. (1998). Food web stability: the inﬂuence of trophic
ﬂows across habitats. Am. Nat. 152, 460ñ469. doi: 10.1086/286182
Issac, P., Robert, M., Le Bris, H., Rault, J., Pawlowski, L., and Kopp, D. (2017).
Investigating feeding ecology of two anglerﬁsh species, Lophius piscatorius and
Lophius budegassa in the Celtic Sea using gut content and isotopic analyses.
Food Webs 13, 33ñ37. doi: 10.1016/j.fooweb.2017.08.001
Johns, D. (2019). Monthly Averaged Data for Diatoms, Dinoﬂagellates, Small
Copepods, Large Copepods, and Various Taxonomic Groups of Zooplankton in
the D4 CPR Standard Area 1958ñ2016 as Recorded by the Continuous Plankton
Recorder Survey. Plymouth, MA: CPR survey. doi: 10.7487/2019.150.1.1197
Joint, I., Wollast, R., Chou, L., Batten, S., Elskens, M., Edwards, E., et al.
(2001). Pelagic production at the Celtic Sea shelf break. Deep Sea Res.
Part II Top. Stud. Oceanogr. 48, 3049ñ3081. doi: 10.1016/S0967-0645(01)
00032-7
Joint, I. R., and Williams, R. (1985). Demands of the herbivore community on
phytoplankton production in the Celtic Sea in August. Mar. Biol. 87, 297ñ306.
doi: 10.1007/BF00397809
Jones, M. C., Dye, S. R., Pinnegar, J. K., Warren, R., and Cheung, W. W. L.
(2012). Modelling commercial ﬁsh distributions: prediction and assessment
using diﬀerent approaches.Ecol. Model. 225, 133ñ145. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.
2011.11.003
Jordan, M. B., and Joint, I. R. (1984). Studies on phytoplankton distribution and
primary production in the western English Channel in 1980 and 1981. Cont.
Shelf Res. 3, 25ñ34. doi: 10.1016/0278-4343(84)90041-4
Kaiser, M. J., Armstrong, P. J., Dare, P. J., and Flatt, R. P. (1998). Benthic
communities associated with a heavily ﬁshed scallop ground in the
english channel. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K. 78, 1045ñ1059. doi: 10.1017/
S0025315400044313
Kaiser, M. J., Bergmann, M., Hinz, H., Galanidi, M., Shucksmith, R., Rees,
E. I. S., et al. (2004). Demersal ﬁsh and epifauna associated with sandbank
habitats. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 60, 445ñ456. doi: 10.1016/j.ecss.2004.
02.005
Kaplan, I. C., Horne, P. J., and Levin, P. S. (2012). Screening California Current
ﬁshery management scenarios using the Atlantis end-to-end ecosystem model.
Prog. Oceanogr. 102, 5ñ18. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2012.03.009
Kay, S., Anderson, H., Eilola, K., Wehde, H., Ramirez-Romero, E., Jordà, G., et al.
(2018). Climate Change and European Aquatic RESources - Deliverable D1.3
Projections of Physical and Biogeochemical Parameters and Habitat Indicators for
European Seas, Including Synthesis of Sea Level Rise and Storminess . Plymouth:
Plymouth Marine Laboratory (PML).
Kortsch, S., Primicerio, R., Aschan, M., Lind, S., Dolgov, A. V., and Planque,
B. (2019). Food-web structure varies along environmental gradients in a
high-latitude marine ecosystem. Ecography 42, 295ñ308. doi: 10.1111/ecog.
03443
Kortsch, S., Primicerio, R., Fossheim, M., Dolgov, A. V., and Aschan, M. (2015).
Climate change alters the structure of arctic marine food webs due to poleward
shifts of boreal generalists. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 282:20151546. doi: 10.1098/
rspb.2015.1546
Kramer, S. J., Roesler, C. S., and Sosik, H. M. (2018). Bio-optical discrimination
of diatoms from other phytoplankton in the surface ocean: evaluation and
reﬁnement of a model for the Northwest Atlantic. Remote Sens. Environ. 217,
126ñ143. doi: 10.1016/j.rse.2018.08.010
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 23 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 24
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
Le Danois, E. (1948). Les Profondeurs de la mer; Trente ans de Recherches sur la
Faune Sous-Marine au Large des Côtes de France. Paris: Payot.
Le Fèvre, J. (1987). Aspects of the biology of frontal systems. Adv. Mar. Biol. 23,
163ñ299. doi: 10.1016/S0065-2881(08)60109-1
Libralato, S. (2013). “System Omnivory Index, ” in Encyclopedia of Ecology , ed.
B. Fath (Amsterdam: Elsevier), 481ñ486. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-409548-9.
00605-9
Libralato, S., Pranovi, F., Stergiou, K., and Link, J. (2014). Trophodynamics in
marine ecology: 70 years after Lindeman. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 512, 1ñ7. doi:
10.3354/meps11033
Libralato, S., and Solidoro, C. (2009). Bridging biogeochemical and food web
models for an End-to-End representation of marine ecosystem dynamics:
the Venice lagoon case study. Ecol. Model. 220, 2960ñ2971. doi: 10.1016/j.
ecolmodel.2009.08.017
Link, J. S. (2010). Adding rigor to ecological network models by evaluating a set
of pre-balance diagnostics: a plea for PREBAL. Ecol. Model. 221, 1580ñ1591.
doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2010.03.012
Logerwell, E. A., and Hargreaves, N. B. (1996). The distribution of sea birds relative
to their ﬁsh prey oﬀ Vancouver Island: opposing results at large and small spatial
scales. Fish. Oceanogr. 5, 163ñ175. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2419.1996.tb00115.x
Lowerre-Barbieri, S. K., Catalán, I. A., Frugård Opdal, A., and Jørgensen, C. (2019).
Preparing for the future: integrating spatial ecology into ecosystem-based
management. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 76, 467ñ476. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsy209
Mackinson, S. (2014). Combined analyses reveal environmentally driven changes
in the North Sea ecosystem and raise questions regarding what makes an
ecosystem model’s performance credible? Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 71, 31ñ46.
doi: 10.1139/cjfas-2013-0173
Mackinson, S., Daskalov, G., Heymans, J. J., Neira, S., Arancibia, H., Zetina-
Rejón, M., et al. (2009). Which forcing factors ﬁt? Using ecosystem models to
investigate the relative inﬂuence of ﬁshing and changes in primary productivity
on the dynamics of marine ecosystems. Ecol. Model. 220, 2972ñ2987. doi: 10.
1016/j.ecolmodel.2008.10.021
Madec, G. (2008). NEMO Ocean Engine . Paris: Institut Pierre-Simon Laplace
(IPSL).
Martinez, I., Ellis, J. R., Scott, B., and Tidd, A. (2013). The ﬁsh and ﬁsheries of
Jones Bank and the wider Celtic Sea. Prog. Oceanogr. 117, 89ñ105. doi: 10.1016/
j.pocean.2013.03.004
Mateo, M., Pawlowski, L., and Robert, M. (2017). Highly mixed ﬁsheries: ﬁne-scale
spatial patterns in retained catches of French ﬁsheries in the Celtic Sea. ICES J.
Mar. Sci. 74, 91ñ101. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsw129
Maureaud, A., Hodapp, D., van Denderen, P. D., Hillebrand, H., Gislason, H.,
Spaanheden Dencker, T., et al. (2019). Biodiversityñecosystem functioning
relationships in ﬁsh communities: biomass is related to evenness and the
environment, not to species richness. Proc. R. Soc. B Biol. Sci. 286:20191189.
doi: 10.1098/rspb.2019.1189
McCann, K. S., Rasmussen, J. B., and Umbanhowar, J. (2005). The dynamics of
spatially coupled food webs: spatially coupled food webs. Ecol. Lett. 8, 513ñ523.
doi: 10.1111/j.1461-0248.2005.00742.x
McCormack, S. A., Trebilco, R., Melbourne-Thomas, J., Blanchard, J. L., Fulton,
E. A., and Constable, A. (2019). Using stable isotope data to advance marine
food web modelling. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish.29, 277ñ296. doi: 10.1007/s11160-019-
09552-4
McGinty, N., Power, A. M., and Johnson, M. P. (2011). Variation among northeast
Atlantic regions in the responses of zooplankton to climate change: not all areas
follow the same path. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol.400, 120ñ131. doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.
2011.02.013
Melian, C. J., and Bascompte, J. (2002). Food web structure and habitat loss. Ecol.
Lett. 5, 37ñ46. doi: 10.1046/j.1461-0248.2002.00280.x
Menge, B. A., and Lubchenco, J. (1981). Community organization in temperate and
tropical rocky intertidal habitats: prey refuges in relation to consumer pressure
gradients. Ecol. Monogr. 51, 429ñ450. doi: 10.2307/2937323
Mérillet, L., Kopp, D., Robert, M., Mouchet, M., and Pavoine, S. (2020).
Environment outweighs the eﬀects of ﬁshing in regulating demersal community
structure in an exploited marine ecosystem. Glob. Change Biol. 26, 2106ñ2119.
doi: 10.1111/gcb.14969
Montero-Serra, I., Edwards, M., and Genner, M. J. (2015). Warming shelf seas drive
the subtropicalization of European pelagic ﬁsh communities. Glob. Change Biol.
21, 144ñ153. doi: 10.1111/gcb.12747
Moore, C., Davie, S., Robert, M., Pawlowski, L., Dolder, P., and Lordan, C. (2019).
Deﬁning métier for the Celtic Sea mixed ﬁsheries: a multiannual international
study of typology. Fish. Res. 219:105310. doi: 10.1016/j.ﬁshres.2019.105310
Morel, A., and Berthon, J.-F. (1989). Surface pigments, algal biomass proﬁles,
and potential production of the euphotic layer: relationships reinvestigated in
view of remote-sensing applications. Limnol. Oceanogr. 34, 1545ñ1562. doi:
10.4319/lo.1989.34.8.1545
Moriarty, M., Sethi, S. A., Pedreschi, D., Smeltz, T. S., McGonigle, C., Harris, B. P.,
et al. (2020). Combining ﬁsheries surveys to inform marine species distribution
modelling. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 77, 539ñ552. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsz254
Mougi, A., and Kondoh, M. (2016). Food-web complexity, meta-community
complexity and community stability. Sci. Rep. 6:24478. doi: 10.1038/srep24478
Moullec, F., Barrier, N., Drira, S., Guilhaumon, F., Marsaleix, P., Somot,
S., et al. (2019a). An end-to-end model reveals losers and winners in a
warming mediterranean sea. Front. Mar. Sci. 6:345. doi: 10.3389/fmars.2019.
00345
Moullec, F., Velez, L., Verley, P., Barrier, N., Ulses, C., Carbonara, P., et al. (2019b).
Capturing the big picture of Mediterranean marine biodiversity with an end-
to-end model of climate and ﬁshing impacts. Prog. Oceanogr. 178, 102179.
doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2019.102179
Moullec, F., Gascuel, D., Bentorcha, K., Guénette, S., and Robert, M. (2017).
Trophic models: What do we learn about Celtic Sea and Bay of Biscay
ecosystems? J. Mar. Syst. 172, 104ñ117. doi: 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2017.03.008
Murdoch, W. W. (1969). Switching in general predators: experiments on predator
speciﬁcity and stability of prey populations. Ecol. Monogr. 39, 335ñ354. doi:
10.2307/1942352
Neat, F. C., Bendall, V., Berx, B., Wright, P. J., ” Cuaig, M., Townhill, B., et al.
(2014). Movement of Atlantic cod around the British Isles: implications for ﬁner
scale stock management. J. Appl. Ecol. 51, 1564ñ1574. doi: 10.1111/1365-2664.
12343
Pade, N. G., Queiroz, N., Humphries, N. E., Witt, M. J., Jones, C. S., Noble, L. R.,
et al. (2009). First results from satellite-linked archival tagging of porbeagle
shark, Lamna nasus: area ﬁdelity, wider-scale movements and plasticity in diel
depth changes. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol. 370, 64ñ74. doi: 10.1016/j.jembe.2008.12.
002
Parker, R. A. (1991). Eddy diﬀusion of phytoplankton and nutrients: estimating
coeﬃcients from simulated and observed vertical distributions. J. Plankton Res.
13, 815ñ830. doi: 10.1093/plankt/13.4.815
Pauly, D., Christensen, V., and Walters, C. (2000). Ecopath, Ecosim, and Ecospace
as tools for evaluating ecosystem impact of ﬁsheries. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57,
697ñ706. doi: 10.1006/jmsc.2000.0726
Pellissier, L., Albouy, C., Bascompte, J., Farwig, N., Graham, C., Loreau, M.,
et al. (2018). Comparing species interaction networks along environmental
gradients: Networks along environmental gradients. Biol. Rev. 93, 785ñ800.
doi: 10.1111/brv.12366
Pellissier, L., Rohr, R. P., Ndiribe, C., Pradervand, J.-N., Salamin, N., Guisan,
A., et al. (2013). Combining food web and species distribution models for
improved community projections. Ecol. Evol. 3, 4572ñ4583. doi: 10.1002/
ece3.843
Pennino, M. G., Bevilacqua, A. H., Torres, M. A., Bellido, J. M., Sole, J., Steenbeek,
J., et al. (2020). Discard ban: a simulation-based approach combining
hierarchical Bayesian and food web spatial models. Mar. Policy 116:103703.
doi: 10.1016/j.marpol.2019.103703
Persohn, C., Lorance, P., and Trenkel, V. M. (2009). Habitat preferences of
selected demersal ﬁsh species in the Bay of Biscay and Celtic Sea, North-
East Atlantic. Fish. Oceanogr. 18, 268ñ285. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2419.2009.
00515.x
Pethybridge, H. R., Choy, C. A., Polovina, J. J., and Fulton, E. A. (2018). Improving
marine ecosystem models with biochemical tracers. Annu. Rev. Mar. Sci. 10,
199ñ228. doi: 10.1146/annurev-marine-121916-063256
Pingree, R. D. (1980). “Chapter 13 Physical Oceanography of the Celtic Sea and
English Channel, ” in Elsevier Oceanography Series , eds F. T. Banner, M. B.
Collins, and K. S. Massie (Amsterdam: Elsevier), 415ñ465. doi: 10.1016/S0422-
9894(08)71358-8
Pingree, R. D., Holligan, P. M., Mardell, G. T., and Head, R. N. (1976). The
inﬂuence of physical stability on spring, summer and autumn phytoplankton
blooms in the Celtic Sea. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K. 56, 845ñ873. doi: 10.1017/
S0025315400020919
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 24 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 25
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
Pingree, R. D., Mardell, G. T., Holligan, P. M., Griﬃths, D. K., and Smithers,
J. (1982). Celtic Sea and Armorican current structure and the vertical
distributions of temperature and chlorophyll. Cont. Shelf Res. 1, 99ñ116. doi:
10.1016/0278-4343(82)90033-4
Pinnegar, J. K., Jennings, S., O’Brien, C. M., and Polunin, N. V. C. (2002). Long-
term changes in the trophic level of the Celtic Sea ﬁsh community and ﬁsh
market price distribution. J. Appl. Ecol. 39, 377ñ390. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2664.
2002.00723.x
Piroddi, C., Coll, M., Liquete, C., Macias, D., Greer, K., Buszowski, J., et al. (2017).
Historical changes of the Mediterranean Sea ecosystem: modelling the role
and impact of primary productivity and ﬁsheries changes over time. Sci. Rep.
7:44491. doi: 10.1038/srep44491
Piroddi, C., Teixeira, H., Lynam, C. P., Smith, C., Alvarez, M. C., Mazik, K.,
et al. (2015). Using ecological models to assess ecosystem status in support of
the European Marine Strategy Framework Directive. Ecol. Indic. 58, 175ñ191.
doi: 10.1016/j.ecolind.2015.05.037
Pitois, S. G., and Fox, C. J. (2006). Long-term changes in zooplankton biomass
concentration and mean size over the Northwest European shelf inferred from
Continuous Plankton Recorder data. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 63, 785ñ798. doi: 10.
1016/j.icesjms.2006.03.009
Polis, G. A., Anderson, W. B., and Holt, R. D. (1997). Toward an integration
of landscape and food-web ecology: the dynamics of spatially subsidized food
webs. Annu. Rev. Ecol. Syst. 28, 289ñ316. doi: 10.1146/annurev.ecolsys.28.1.289
Polis, G. A., Holt, R. D., Menge, B. A., and Winemiller, K. O. (1996). “Time, space,
and life history: inﬂuences on food webs, ” in Food Webs, eds G. A. Polis and
K. O. Winemiller (Boston, MA: Springer), 435ñ460. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4615-
7007-3_38
Poulard, J.-C., and Blanchard, F. (2005). The impact of climate change on the ﬁsh
community structure of the eastern continental shelf of the Bay of Biscay. ICES
J. Mar. Sci. 62, 1436ñ1443. doi: 10.1016/j.icesjms.2005.04.017
Punzón, A., Serrano, A., Sánchez, F., Velasco, F., Preciado, I., González-Irusta,
J. M., et al. (2016). Response of a temperate demersal ﬁsh community to global
warming. J. Mar. Syst. 161, 1ñ10. doi: 10.1016/j.jmarsys.2016.05.001
Rault, J., Le Bris, H., Robert, M., Pawlowski, L., Denamiel, M., and Kopp, D. (2017).
Diets and trophic niches of the main commercial ﬁsh species from the Celtic
Sea. J. Fish Biol. 91, 1449ñ1474. doi: 10.1111/jfb.13470
Raymont, J. E. G. (1980). Plankton & Productivity in the Oceans , Second Edn.
Oxford: Pergamon Press Ltd. doi: 10.1016/C2009-0-10951-0
Rees, H. (1999). A comparison of benthic biodiversity in the North Sea, English
Channel, and Celtic Seas. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 56, 228ñ246. doi: 10.1006/jmsc.1998.
0438
Reid, D. G. (2001). SEFOS-shelf edge ﬁsheries and oceanography studies: an
overview. Fish. Res. 50, 1ñ15. doi: 10.1016/S0165-7836(00)00238-1
Reid, D. G., Calderwood, J., Afonso, P., Bourdaud, P., Fauconnet, L., González-
Irusta, J. M., et al. (2019). “The Best Way to Reduce Discards Is by Not Catching
Them!, ” inThe European Landing Obligation, eds S. S. Uhlmann, C. Ulrich, and
S. J. Kennelly (Cham: Springer), 257ñ278. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-03308-8_13
Robert, M., Calderwood, J., Radford, Z., Catchpole, T., Reid, D. G., and Pawlowski,
L. (2019). Spatial distribution of discards in mixed ﬁsheries: species trade-
oﬀs, potential spatial avoidance and national contrasts. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 29,
917ñ934. doi: 10.1007/s11160-019-09581-z
Romagnoni, G., Mackinson, S., Hong, J., and Eikeset, A. M. (2015). The Ecospace
model applied to the North Sea: evaluating spatial predictions with ﬁsh biomass
and ﬁshing eﬀort data. Ecol. Model. 300, 50ñ60. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2014.
12.016
Rooney, N., McCann, K., Gellner, G., and Moore, J. C. (2006). Structural
asymmetry and the stability of diverse food webs. Nature 442, 265ñ269. doi:
10.1038/nature04887
Scales, K. L., Miller, P. I., Hawkes, L. A., Ingram, S. N., Sims, D. W., and Votier,
S. C. (2014). REVIEW: on the Front Line: frontal zones as priority at-sea
conservation areas for mobile marine vertebrates. J. Appl. Ecol. 51, 1575ñ1583.
doi: 10.1111/1365-2664.12330
Scott, E., Serpetti, N., Steenbeek, J., and Heymans, J. J. (2016). A Stepwise Fitting
Procedure for automated ﬁtting of Ecopath with Ecosim models. SoftwareX 5,
25ñ30. doi: 10.1016/j.softx.2016.02.002
Serpetti, N., Baudron, A. R., Burrows, M. T., Payne, B. L., Helaouët, P., Fernandes,
P. G., et al. (2017). Impact of ocean warming on sustainable ﬁsheries
management informs the Ecosystem Approach to Fisheries. Sci. Rep. 7:13438.
doi: 10.1038/s41598-017-13220-7
Sharples, J., Ellis, J. R., Nolan, G., and Scott, B. E. (2013). Fishing and the
oceanography of a stratiﬁed shelf sea. Prog. Oceanogr. 117, 130ñ139. doi: 10.
1016/j.pocean.2013.06.014
Sharples, J., Tweddle, J. F., Mattias Green, J. A., Palmer, M. R., Kim, Y.-N.,
Hickman, A. E., et al. (2007). Spring-neap modulation of internal tide mixing
and vertical nitrate ﬂuxes at a shelf edge in summer. Limnol. Oceanogr. 52,
1735ñ1747. doi: 10.4319/lo.2007.52.5.1735
Shephard, S., Fung, T., Houle, J. E., Farnsworth, K. D., Reid, D. G., and Rossberg,
A. G. (2012). Size-selective ﬁshing drives species composition in the Celtic Sea.
ICES J. Mar. Sci. 69, 223ñ234. doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsr200
Shephard, S., Reid, D. G., and Greenstreet, S. P. R. (2011). Interpreting the large
ﬁsh indicator for the Celtic Sea. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 68, 1963ñ1972. doi: 10.1093/
icesjms/fsr114
Shin, Y., and Cury, P. (2001). Exploring ﬁsh community dynamics through size-
dependent trophic interactions using a spatialized individual-based model.
Aquat. Living Resour. 14, 65ñ80. doi: 10.1016/S0990-7440(01)01106-8
Simpson, J. H. (1976). A boundary front in the summer regime of the Celtic Sea.
Estuar. Coast. Mar. Sci. 4, 71ñ81. doi: 10.1016/0302-3524(76)90008-6
Simpson, S. D., Jennings, S., Johnson, M. P., Blanchard, J. L., Schön, P.-J., Sims,
D. W., et al. (2011). Continental Shelf-Wide Response of a Fish Assemblage to
Rapid Warming of the Sea. Curr. Biol. 21, 1565ñ1570. doi: 10.1016/j.cub.2011.
08.016
Southward, A. J., Boalch, G. T., and Maddock, L. (1988). Fluctuations in the
herring and pilchard ﬁsheries of devon and cornwall linked to change in climate
since the 16th century. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K. 68, 423ñ445. doi: 10.1017/
S0025315400043320
Steenbeek, J., Buszowski, J., Christensen, V., Akoglu, E., Aydin, K., Ellis, N.,
et al. (2016). Ecopath with Ecosim as a model-building toolbox: source code
capabilities, extensions, and variations. Ecol. Model. 319, 178ñ189. doi: 10.1016/
j.ecolmodel.2015.06.031
Steenbeek, J., Coll, M., Gurney, L., Mélin, F., Hoepﬀner, N., Buszowski, J., et al.
(2013). Bridging the gap between ecosystem modeling tools and geographic
information systems: driving a food web model with external spatialñ
temporal data. Ecol. Model. 263, 139ñ151. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2013.
04.027
Steenbeek, J., Corrales, X., Platts, M., and Coll, M. (2018). Ecosampler: a
new approach to assessing parameter uncertainty in Ecopath with Ecosim.
SoftwareX 7, 198ñ204. doi: 10.1016/j.softx.2018.06.004
Tam, J. C., Link, J. S., Rossberg, A. G., Rogers, S. I., Levin, P. S., Rochet, M.-J.,
et al. (2017). Towards ecosystem-based management: identifying operational
food-web indicators for marine ecosystems. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 74, 2040ñ2052.
doi: 10.1093/icesjms/fsw230
ter Hofstede, R., Hiddink, J., and Rijnsdorp, A. (2010). Regional warming changes
ﬁsh species richness in the eastern North Atlantic Ocean. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser.
414, 1ñ9. doi: 10.3354/meps08753
Théro, H., Rivot, E., Robert, M., Guitton, J., Kopp, D., Gascuel, D.,
et al. (2020). EcoDiet. R package version 1.0.0.0 . doi: 10.5281/zenodo.40
81537
Tidd, A. N., and Warnes, S. (2006). Species Distributions from English Celtic Sea
Groundﬁsh Surveys, 1992–2003 (Science Series Technical Report) . Lowestoft:
Cefas.
Ting, M., Kushnir, Y., Seager, R., and Li, C. (2009). Forced and internal twentieth-
century SST trends in the North Atlantic. J. Clim. 22, 1469ñ1481. doi: 10.1175/
2008JCLI2561.1
Tinker, J. P., Howes, E. L., Wakelin, S., Menary, M., Kent, E., Berry, D., et al. (2020).
The impacts of climate change on temperature (air and sea), relevant to the
coastal and marine environment around the UK. MCCIP Sci. Rev. 2020, 1ñ30.
doi: 10.14465/2020.ARC01.TEM
Tomczak, M. T., Niiranen, S., Hjerne, O., and Blenckner, T. (2012). Ecosystem
ﬂow dynamics in the Baltic ProperóUsing a multi-trophic dataset as a basis
for foodñweb modelling. Ecol. Model. 230, 123ñ147. doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.
2011.12.014
Torres, L. G., Read, A. J., and Halpin, P. (2008). Fine-scale habitat modeling of a
top marine predator: Do prey data improve predictive capacity? Ecol. Appl. 18,
1702ñ1717. doi: 10.1890/07-1455.1
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 25 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717
fmars-07-578717 December 2, 2020 Time: 19:49 # 26
Hernvann et al. Spatial Food Web Modeling of the Celtic Sea
Travers, M., Shin, Y.-J., Jennings, S., and Cury, P. (2007). Towards end-to-end
models for investigating the eﬀects of climate and ﬁshing in marine ecosystems.
Prog. Oceanogr. 75, 751ñ770. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2007.08.001
Travers, M., Shin, Y.-J., Jennings, S., Machu, E., Huggett, J. A., Field, J. G., et al.
(2009). Two-way coupling versus one-way forcing of plankton and ﬁsh models
to predict ecosystem changes in the Benguela. Ecol. Model. 220, 3089ñ3099.
doi: 10.1016/j.ecolmodel.2009.08.016
Trenkel, V., Pinnegar, J., Dawson, W., Du Buit, M., and Tidd, A. (2005). Spatial
and temporal structure of predator-prey relationships in the Celtic Sea ﬁsh
community. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 299, 257ñ268. doi: 10.3354/meps299257
Trenkel, V. M., Huse, G., MacKenzie, B. R., Alvarez, P., Arrizabalaga, H.,
Castonguay, M., et al. (2014). Comparative ecology of widely distributed pelagic
ﬁsh species in the North Atlantic: implications for modelling climate and
ﬁsheries impacts. Prog. Oceanogr. 129, 219ñ243. doi: 10.1016/j.pocean.2014.04.
030
Vallet, C., and Dauvin, J.-C. (1998). Composition and diversity of the benthic
boundary layer macrofauna from the english channel. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U.K.
78, 387ñ409. doi: 10.1017/S0025315400041527
Walters, C. (1999). Ecospace: prediction of mesoscale spatial patterns in trophic
relationships of exploited ecosystems, with emphasis on the impacts of marine
protected areas. Ecosystems 2, 539ñ554. doi: 10.1007/s100219900101
Walters, C., Christensen, V., and Pauly, D. (1997). Structuring dynamic models
of exploited ecosystems from trophic mass-balance assessments. Rev. Fish Biol.
Fish. 7, 139ñ172. doi: 10.1023/A:1018479526149
Ward, T., Hoedt, F., McLeay, L., Dimmlich, W., Jackson, G., Rogers, P., et al.
(2001). Have recent mass mortalities of the sardine Sardinops sagax facilitated
an expansion in the distribution and abundance of the anchovy Engraulis
australis in South Australia? Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 220, 241ñ251. doi: 10.3354/
meps220241
Warnes, S., and Jones, B. W. (1995). Species Distributions from
English Celtic Sea Groundﬁsh Surveys, 1984 to 1991 (Fisheries
Research Technical Report) . Lowestoft: MAFF Directorate of Fisheries
Research.
Wood, S. N. (2017). Generalized Additive Models: An Introduction with
R, 2nd Edn. London: Chapman and Hall. doi: 10.1201/97813153
70279
Conﬂict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in the
absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a
potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2020 Hernvann, Gascuel, Grüss, Druon, Kopp, Perez, Piroddi and
Robert. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in
other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s) and the copyright owner(s)
are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited, in accordance
with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or reproduction is permitted
which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Marine Science | www.frontiersin.org 26 December 2020 | Volume 7 | Article 578717