301
 
this group was not included in the model.
2. Dolphins in the Java Sea are considered to be
 
resident (Buchary 1999; Tas’an and Leather-
 
wood 1984). Whales, however, are transient in
 
the system (Buchary 1999; Jefferson et al. 1993;
 
Klinowska 1991; Rice 1989), migrating from 
 
the Indian Ocean, through the Java Sea and then 
 
to the Pacific Ocean during the winter to breed, 
 
and returning during the summer, mainly to 
 
feed. Thus, dolphins and whales were initially 
 
separated into two functional groups. While 
 
balancing the model, however, unrealistic values 
 
for the transient whales were obtained, (e.g. 
 
respiration exceeded assimilation). The problem 
 
was resolved by aggregating these two groups 
 
into a single marine mammal group.
Other taxa identified but not accommodated in the 
model were marine turtles and marine birds, even 
though their existence in the Java Sea is a matter of 
record. Marine turtles in the Java Sea (Buchary 
1999; White 1983) include the hawksbill turtle 
(Eretmochelys imbricata), and to a lesser extent 
the green turtle (Chelonia mydas). No population 
estimates are presently available for either species 
in the study area, but both are considered to be 
endangered (Buchary 1999; Groombridge 1982). 
Hence, their population was assumed too small to 
incorporate into the model. A similar rationale was 
followed for marine birds, based on the following 
evidence. White (1983) and Buchary (1999)  noted 
that there are 131 species of marine birds recorded 
in Indonesia. The majority of them are shorebirds 
and vagrant waders, which occur in coastal mud­
flats, marshes and mangroves. Additionally, oce­
anic seabirds usually form colonies on smaller 
islands away from the presence of humans. True 
marine birds are rare in the Java Sea. Consequently, 
this group was not included in the model.
To perform efficiently, and be both ecologically 
and biologically realistic, an Ecopath model should 
have at least a dozen functional groups (Chris­
tensen and Pauly 1996). There is no upper limit on 
how many groups can be accommodated, but 
existing models typically include 25 - 35 groups. 
The present model falls within this range with 
27 functional groups (Table 1).
parameters for the functional groups were calcu­
lated as arithmetic mean, without weighing. The 
aggregation process into ecological groups was per­
formed based on similarities in habitat, body size, 
growth and mortality rates and diet composition, 
after the method described by Christensen and 
Pauly (1996). 
Fish were allocated into functional groups first by 
habitat preferences, then by body size. Size ranges 
were specified so that fish with an average or maxi­
mum body length of less than 40 cm were consid­
ered “small”. Fish with an average or maximum 
body length between 40 and 60 cm were consid­
ered “medium”; those that were greater than 60 cm 
were considered “large”. For some species groups, 
the allocation process was quite straightforward 
because of their significant contribution to land­
ings, (e.g. clupeoids, Decapterus spp.) and/or in the 
trawl surveys, (e.g. leiognathids). These therefore 
formed individual functional groups.
Some groups other than fish, however, presented 
problems. For instance, the marine mammal spe­
cies proved difficult to handle. Based on a literature 
search, the following marine mammals were re­
ported to occur in the Java Sea: dugongs, resident 
dolphins, and transient whales (Buchary 1999; Jef­
ferson et al. 1993; Klinowska 1991; Rice 1989; 
Tas’an and Leatherwood 1984; White 1983). In the 
process of data analysis and model parameteriza­
tion, a number of modifications were found neces­
sary to balance the model and are described below:
1. As an endangered species that receives very 
 
little attention in Indonesia, the population of 
 
dugong in the Java Sea is probably very small, 
 
though actual counts of this species in the study
 
area do not exist. However, an account was 
 
made of the dugong’s distribution, based on
 
unstructured interviews with local people
 
throughout its suspected distribution range,
 
conducted from the late 1960s to the late 1970s
 
(Buchary 1999; Nishiwaki et al. 1979). Assu-
 
ming that these data provide a relative index of 
 
abundance, an estimation of dugong biomass in 
 
the Java Sea was obtained which was so low (less 
 
than 0.0001 t·km-2) that it has no bearing on 
 
the trophic dynamics of the ecosystem. Hence, 
