302
WorldFish Center
Ecological group
Taxa 
Benthic producers
Marine algae (epilithic algae, endolithic algae, reef turf algae, benthic fleshly algae, 
macroalgae, and benthic algae) and spermatophytes (sea grass)
Phytoplankton
Dominated by diatoms (Bacteriatrum spp., Biddulphia spp., Bacillaria spp., Chaetoceros 
spp., Coscinodiscus spp., Ditylum spp., Eucampia spp., Hemiaulus spp., Hemidiscus spp., 
Lauderia spp., Leptocylindricus spp., Nitzschia spp., Rhizosolenia spp., Skeletonema spp., 
Streptotheca spp., Thalassiothrix spp. Thalassionema spp. and dinoflagellates (Ceratium 
spp., Dinophysis spp., and Peridinium spp.) 
Small herbivorous zooplankton (Small herb. 
Zoopl.)
Copepods, ostracods, bivalve larvae, cirripedia larvae, cladocerans, echinoderm larvae, 
larvacea, other mollusc larvae
Large herbivorous zooplankton (Lg. Herb. Zoopl)
Mysids, sergestids, euphausiids, amphipods, luciferidae, and other decapod larvae
Carnivorous zooplankton
Chaetognaths (Sagitta spp.), annelids and ichthyoplankton
Jellyfishes
All medusoid form of cnidarians (hydrozoa and scyphozoa only); although scyphozoa 
medusae dominate
Benthic infauna
Includes all burrowing benthos ≤ 1.0 mm, viz., polychaetes, molluscs, echinoderms, 
crustaceans, sipunculids, and benthic stage larvae of other larger organisms 
Structure-associated fish (SAF)
Includes all fish that are ecologically dependent (directly and/or indirectly) on living 
bottom structure (LBS, see group 10) to complete their life cycle. For this model, it 
includes fish of the families Balistidae, demersal Carangidae, Lethrinidae, Lutjanidae, 
Pentapodidae, Platacidae, Polynemidae, Sparidae, Sphyraenidae, Scaridae, Acanthuri­
dae, and Tetraodontidae  
Macrozoobenthos
This group includes all larger (size > 1.0 mm) molluscs and echinoderms, such as 
conch, oyster, scallops, clams, cockles, mussels, sea urchins, sea cucumbers, and sea 
stars. 
Living bottom structure (LBS)
All biogenic organisms that live on and/or are attached to the sea floor, such as sponges 
(notably giant cup sponges, viz. Poterion nautilus, P. neptuni, and P. amphitritae), 
gorgonians (sea fans and sea whips), soft coral, sea pens, sea anemones, etc.
Juvenile penaeid shrimp (Juv. Pen. Shrimp)
Includes all juvenile shrimps, not just penaeid shrimps. However, parameterization of 
this group is based on the juveniles of Penaeus spp. and Metapenaeus spp.  
Large pelagic predators - juvenile (Lg. Pel. Pred. J)
Juveniles of the families Chirocentridae, large Scombridae, and Trichiuridae 
Adult penaeid shrimps (Ad. Pen. Shrimps)
Includes all adult shrimps, but data refer only to Penaeus spp. and Metapenaeus spp.
Miscellaneous pelagics (Misc. pelagics)
Belonidae, Carangidae, Harpodontidae, Hemirhamphidae, Lactaridae, Mobulidae, 
Scianidae (Kathala axillaris), and Scombridae (Auxis sp.)
Leiognathids 
Gazza minuta, Leiognathus spp., and Secutor spp.
Crabs and Lobsters
Portunidae, Palinuridae, Scyllaridae, etc.
Cephalopods
Includes squids (Loligo spp.), cuttlefish (Sepia spp.) and octopus (Octopus spp.)
Decapterus spp.
Decapterus macrosoma, D. maruadsi and D. russelli
Rastrelliger spp.
Rastrelliger brachysoma and R. kanagurta
Clupeoids
Clupeidae and Engraulidae
Table 1. Composition of the 27 ecological groups used for modeling the fisheries resources of the north coast of Central Java model. 
