See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/263132786
Ecosystem approach to ﬁsheries management in the northern
Benguela: The Namibian experience
Article  in  African Journal of Marine Science · June 2004
DOI: 10.2989/18142320409504051
CITATIONS
46
READS
84
2 authors:
Some of the authors of this publication are also working on these related projects:
IndiSeas View project
Benguela Current ecosystem View project
Jean-Paul Roux
University of Cape Town
71 PUBLICATIONS   2,254 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
Lynne J Shannon
University of Cape Town
117 PUBLICATIONS   6,765 CITATIONS   
SEE PROFILE
All content following this page was uploaded by Jean-Paul Roux on 27 October 2014.
The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.
To date, management of Namibian fisheries has been
based almost entirely on single-stock assessments.
Only a few implemented management measures,
such as the minimum depth limit for bottom trawling
or size selection devices in codends, were motivated
to limit the bycatch of juveniles or other non-targeted
species. Trophic interactions, competition or predator-
prey relationships are not taken into account in the
management procedures. However, Namibia is com-
mitted to complement these methods by implementing
an ecosystem approach to fisheries (EAF). This paper
provides a background to the northern Benguela
ecosystem and the history of the development and
management of its main fisheries. It documents the
progress made to date towards introducing an EAF in
Namibia, with particular emphasis on the role of
ecosystem modelling. The foundations that have al-
ready been laid for the future development of eco-
system-based management in Namibian fisheries are
described, and attention is drawn to the need to further
define and agree on the role and direction of future
ecosystem research. 
BIOLOGICAL AND HISTORICAL 
BACKGROUND
The northern Benguela system is a typical eastern
boundary current upwelling system, characterized by
high biological productivity. Its northern limit is the
Angola–Benguela Front, a well-marked oceanographic
feature that separates the tropical water of the Angola
Current and the cool, nutrient-rich, upwelled water of
the Benguela (Fig. 1). The front is situated off southern
Angola, shifting seasonally between 14 and 17°S (Shan-
non 1985, Shannon and Nelson 1996). Off southern
Namibia, the Lüderitz upwelling cell is a perennial fea-
ture, and is considered the most intense upwelling cell
of the world’s oceans (Bakun 1993, 1996). This region
of very high wind stress, high turbulence and cold
water seems to act as an environmental barrier to most
fish stocks, and in effect divides the Benguela eco-
system into northern and southern components
(Shannon 1985, Agenbag and Shannon 1988). 
With the exception of some highly migratory large
Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela
Afr. J. mar. Sci. 26: 79–93
2004
79
ECOSYSTEM APPROACH TO FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN THE 
NORTHERN BENGUELA: THE NAMIBIAN EXPERIENCE
J-P . ROUX* and L. J. SHANNON†
The northern Benguela marine resources have a long history of questionable management primarily because of
the limitations of management measures under the political framework of the time (either free access or under
an international authority with no national representation, authority or enforcement power). Only after its
Independence in 1990 could Namibia exercise its own national management policies, but by that time the most
important commercial stocks were severely depleted. Since Independence, and despite strong management
measures being implemented, the recovery of the stocks has not been as successful as expected. Some of the
possible reasons are the effect of environmental variability on some stocks, ecosystem effects of fishing and 
unforeseen trophic interaction effects. To date, fisheries management has been based largely on a single-stock
approach, but Namibia is committed to implement, in addition, an ecosystem approach to fisheries (EAF) manage-
ment. The work leading to this implementation is described, in particular an ecosystem modelling study under-
taken to summarize the current understanding of the northern Benguela ecosystem, to provide a basis for future
work towards an EAF in Namibia. Model simulation results suggest that, given the present assumed trophic
structure of the northern Benguela, altering the major fisheries would not result in recovery of the small pelagics
to levels seen 40 years ago, suggesting that the original foodweb in the region may have been altered dramati-
cally. Cape hake Merluccius capensis and M. paradoxus were negatively impacted when a large fishery on
small horse mackerel Trachurus trachurus capensis was simulated. Model simulations illustrate the important
finding that ecosystem effects of altered fishing scenarios are often not of a magnitude or direction that would
be expected by considering predator-prey relationships in the absence of indirect trophic effects. Trophic effects
may have large indirect consequences for some components of the system, for example seabirds.
Key words:  ecosystem model, fisheries management, Namibia, northern Benguela 
* Lüderitz Marine Research, Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, P.O. Box 394, Lüderitz, Namibia. E-mail: jproux@mfmr.gov.na
† Marine & Coastal Management, Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism, Private Bag X2, Rogge Bay 8012, South Africa
Manuscript received January 2004; accepted August 2004
pelagic species such as tunas and swordfish, and pos-
sibly some deep-water demersal species, such as Cape
hake Merluccius paradoxus, shared with the southern
Benguela, most fish stocks of the northern Benguela
are considered to be discrete, with their distribution
limited by the Angola–Benguela Front to the north and
the Lüderitz upwelling region to the south (Fig. 1).
They can, therefore, be regarded as single management
units. The composition of biological communities of
the northern Benguela is comparable with that of the
southern Benguela, the same species constituting the
main commercial stocks (Bianchi et al. 1999). The
northern Benguela system is subjected to large-scale
environmental variability, which originates in the
tropics and is similar to the El Niño phenomenon in
the Pacific Ocean. These major environmental anoma-
lies, termed Benguela Niños, have severe biological
effects at all levels of the marine foodweb (Shannon
et al. 1986, Gammelsrød et al. 1998, Roux 2003). 
Early history of marine resource exploitation,
1750–1900
The hyper-arid and inhospitable Namib Desert extends
along the entire coast of the northern Benguela.
Consequently, the coast has always been sparsely pop-
ulated, and there is no evidence that indigenous pop-
ulations were ever engaged in artisanal fisheries.
However, the few nomadic groups that roamed the
coastline until the late 19
th century used marine re-
sources extensively, as the composition of their middens
attests: shellfish, seabirds and marine mammals were
the major food, penguin and fur seal pelts were used
for clothing, and whale bones to build shelters (Avery
1985, Best and Ross 1996, Kinahan 1990).
The first large-scale commercial exploitation of ma-
rine resources in the northern Benguela started about
three centuries ago, with the development of sealing
and whaling activities by North American and European
vessels (Best and Ross 1995, David 1995). The oper-
ations were unregulated and indiscriminate, and re-
sulted in the rapid depletion of the targeted stocks.
Catches of southern right whales Eubalaena aus-
tralis were already declining by the beginning of the
19
th century (Richards and du Pasquier 1989) and the
local breeding population was possibly totally eradi-
cated by the beginning of the 20
th century (Best and
Ross 1986, Roux et al. 2001). Similarly, the Cape fur
seal Arctocephalus pusillus pusillus population was
driven to very low levels by the end of the 19th century,
and had been eradicated from at least 23 island colonies
throughout the species’ range (Shaughnessy 1984,
David 1995). After the decline in fur seals, attention
was shifted to the exploitation of guano from the
seabird islands, which started with the Ichaboe Island
guano rush (1843–1845) and has continued until pre-
sent. Whalers, sealers and other mariners episodically
exploited seabird colonies off Namibia throughout
the 18
th and 19 th century for fresh meat and eggs
(Anon. 1845, Eden 1846, Best and Shaughnessy 1979,
Kinahan 1990). The additional exploitation of seabirds
and disturbance associated with the early guano ex-
ploitation during the late 19
th and early 20th centuries
impacted negatively on seabird populations and par-
ticularly the African penguin, Spheniscus demersus
(Roux et al. in press). By the end of the 19
th century,
only a few stocks had been exploited, but in the ab-
sence of regulatory management measures they were
all severely depleted. 
Pre-independence 20
th century fisheries expansion
At the beginning of the 20 th century, regulation of
sealing began, as government enterprise, on all islands.
Seal harvests at Cape Cross, which had been conducted
80 Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela
African Journal of Marine Science 26
2004
12° 14° 16° 18° 20° E
30°
28°
26°
24°
22°
20°
18°
16°
S
ANGOLA
NAMIBIA
Kunene
         River
Walvis Bay
Lüderitz
Lüderitz
upwelling cell
SOUTHERN
BENGUELA
NORTHERN
BENGUELA
SOUTH
AFRICA
Orange
        River
Angola/Benguela front
Swakopmund
Cape Cross
Ichaboe
Island
Fig. 1: Map of the nor thern Benguela showing places 
mentioned in the text
by private enterprise since before 1903, continued
without catch limits until the mid 1970s (Best 1973,
Shaughnessy 1982). As the seal population recovered
from earlier unregulated overexploitation, the catches
increased rapidly, particularly between 1950 and 1970
(Wickens et al . 1991).  In the early 1970s, govern-
ment involvement in sealing ended and, with the pro-
mulgation of the Sea Birds and Seals Protection Act
in 1973, the industry has been run by private conces-
sionaires under a quota system. In addition to those
legally harvested, a considerable number of seals were
also killed by fishing vessels at sea, particularly by
purse-seiners targeting small pelagic fish, and linefish
boats targeting snoek Thyrsites atun (Shaughnessy
1982, Wickens et al. 1991).  In the early 1980s, the
catches declined markedly as a result of a collapse of
the world market for pelts, the main product of the
sealing industry up until then. 
The Cape rock lobster Jasus lalandiifishery, operat-
ing from Lüderitz, started in the 1930s and developed
rapidly in the late 1940s, peaking in the early 1950s
with approximately 14 000 tons of lobsters landed in
1952 (Stuttaford 1994). Despite several management
measures put in place (annual quotas, size limits, closed
season), catches of rock lobster declined steadily until
the late 1960s, when the size limit was abolished.
This resulted in severe depletion of the stock, and
catches remained below 2 000 tons, with no sign of
stock recovery. An additional rapid stock decline during
the 1988/89 fishing season was probably caused in part
by anomalously low oxygen concentrations in coastal
waters at that time. As a consequence, the annual
fishing quota was reduced from 2 000 tons in 1988/89
to 100 tons in 1991/92.
The development and decline during the 20
th cen-
tury of the different industrial fisheries targeting fish
species in the northern Benguela (Fig. 2) was reviewed
by Boyer and Hampton (2001). The purse-seine fishery
targeting sardine Sardinops sagax first developed
during the late 1940s (Armstrong and Thomas 1995),
and increased rapidly in the 1960s after relaxation of the
quotas and the introduction of factory vessels. Catches
peaked in 1968 at 1.4 million tons after the adoption
of a smaller mesh size, but declined markedly over
the following years. After a brief partial recovery in the
mid-1970s, the stock finally collapsed to extremely
low levels by 1977. The purse-seine fleet, while con-
tinuing to catch sardine (and probably contributing to
keeping the stock at a very low level), shifted its activ-
ities to anchovy Engraulis encrasicolus. This species
dominated the pelagic catches for a few years in the
late 1970s and early 1980s, together with juvenile
horse mackerel Trachurus trachurus capensis.
The second phase in the history of the northern
Roux & Shannon: EAF in the Northern Benguela2004 81
1950 53 56 59 62 65 68 71 74 77 80 83 86 89 92 95 98
500
2 000LANDINGS ('000 tons)
1 500
1 000
Others
Demersals
Large pelagics
Small pelagics
Horse mackerel
Cape hake
Sardine
Fig. 2: Commercial landings from the northern Benguela during the second half of the 20th century (redrawn and
modified from Boyer and Hampton 2001, and Ministry of Fisheries and Marine Resources, unpublished
data). The species were grouped as follows: Cape hake, both M. capensis and M. paradoxus; horse
mackerel: catches from midwater trawlers and purse-seiners; small pelagic: anchovy, round herring and
other small pelagic species; large pelagics: tuna, snoek and chub mackerel Scomber japonicus; demersal:
includes monkfish Lophius spp., kingklip Genypterus capensis, sole Austroglossus spp. and Dentex; others:
includes fur seals, crustaceans (rock lobster and crab), and orange roughy Hoplostethus atlanticus
Benguela commercial fisheries started in the mid-
1960s, with the development of a long-distance trawl
fishery targeting the two species of Cape hake, the
shallow-water Merluccius capensis and the deep-
water M. paradoxus. The fishery was operated mainly
by nations other than Namibia, which at that time
had not attained its Independence. Catches increased
rapidly to peak in 1972 at more than 800 000 tons, but
started declining rapidly soon thereafter. Despite some
attempts at implementing management measures,such
as minimum mesh size (in 1975) and total allowable
catches (in 1977), hake landings continued to decline
until the early 1980s (van der Westhuizen 2001). Two
strong year-classes in the early 1980s likely con-
tributed to a slight increase in the catches of Cape
hake, but by the end of that decade the stocks were
severely depleted. The reason for the poor perfor-
mance of the management measures proposed by the
International Commission for the Southeast Atlantic
Fisheries (ICSEAF) are debatable, but poor imple-
mentation and likely biased reporting of catches and
efforts are suspected to have played a major role in the
decline in Cape hake stocks (Oelofsen 1999, Boyer
and Hampton 2001).
As Cape hake catches started to decline in the early
1970s, and after the crash of the sardine fishery, the
midwater trawl fishery that was targeting horse mack-
erel expanded considerably. Annual catches of horse
mackerel rapidly increased between the early 1970s
and early 1980s to more than 600 000 tons, possibly
following an increase in the stock biomass (Vaske et al.
1989). While slowly declining from the 1980s through
to present, horse mackerel catches have dominated the
catches in the region since the late 1970s (Fig. 2).
The development of the commercial fisheries in the
northern Benguela until Namibian Independence in
1990 is characterized by sequential exploitation and
depletion of the three most important stocks. The
total fish catches increased rapidly throughout the
1960s to reach 2.3 million tons in 1968, dominated by
sardine (61.3%). Thereafter, catches declined sharply
to 1.5 million tons in 1972, dominated by Cape hake
(54%), then declined further to 0.9 million tons in
1989, dominated by horse mackerel (44.9%). In ad-
dition to these changes in the fisheries and the com-
mercial stocks, the period was also marked by other
major changes in the foodweb and possibly in the
functioning of the northern Benguela ecosystem as a
whole (Cury and Shannon 2004, Heymans et al. 2004).
In particular, jellyfish biomass seems to have in-
creased markedly over the Namibian shelf since the
1970s (Venter 1988, Fearon et al. 1992). The principal
forage species of most of the top predators changed
from sardine and anchovy to pelagic goby Sufflogobius
bibarbatus , following a probable large increase in
biomass of the species from the late 1960s (Crawford
et al. 1985).
Fisheries management since Namibia’s indepen-
dence
Only after independence in 1990, by when Namibia’s
major fish resources were already severely depleted,
could the country proclaim full authority over its ma-
rine resources. Therefore, at Independence, the first
priorities were to stop illegal fishing, to implement
management measures to rebuild the depleted stocks,
and to ensure sustainable exploitation of the resources
for the benefit of the new nation (Oelofsen 1999).
After proclaiming its authority over a 200 nautical
mile EEZ, Namibia promulgated laws and regulations
and implemented management measures to protect its
fish stocks. Success was rapid; within a year, illegal
fishing by foreign fleets was virtually eradicated, some
stocks showed encouraging signs of recovery (Stut-
taford 1994), and the contribution of the fisheries
sector to the Namibian economy started to increase
(Kankondi 1994). In order to improve scientific advice
to decision-makers on how to manage the marine re-
sources, two new research institutes were established;
the national Marine Information and Research Centre
in Swakop-mund and the Lüderitz Research Centre.
However, these early successes were also accom-
panied by shortcomings. For example, some major
stocks, particularly small pelagics, failed to recover as
expected (Boyer and Hampton 2001), and the status
of some vulnerable and endangered species such as
Cape gannets Morus capensis, African penguins and
bank cormorants Phalacrocorax neglectus worsened
(Crawford et al. 1999, Kemper et al. 2001, Du Toit et
al. 2002). Total fish landings in the northern Benguela
continued to decline in the 1990s, falling to just over
560 000 tons in 2000, consisting mostly of horse mack-
erel (58.6%). A moratorium was placed on the sar-
dine fishery in 2001 for one year, the first time since
the fishery had begun. This followed some environ-
mental anomalies during the mid-1990s, including
the major 1995 Benguela Niño. The moratorium high-
lighted two shortcomings in the management proce-
dures at that time: the single-stock approach does not
(cannot) explicitly take into account (1) the effects of
environmental anomalies, and (2) trophic effects and
multispecies interactions. This is a major challenge
for fisheries research and management in the 21
st
century (Roux 2003).
82 Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela
African Journal of Marine Science 26
2004
TOW ARDS A MULTISPECIES APPROACH TO
FISHERIES MANAGEMENT IN THE 
NORTHERN BENGUELA
The principles of natural resources (and therefore
fisheries) utilization in Namibia are enshrined in the
constitution, which states inter alia: “The State shall
actively promote and maintain the welfare of the
people by adopting policies aimed at... the mainte-
nance of ecosystems, essential ecological processes
and biological diversity of Namibia and utilization of
living natural resources on a sustainable basis for the
benefit of Namibians, both present and future...”
(Constitution of the Republic of Namibia – Article 95.l;
http://www.orusovo.com/namcon/constitution.pdf).
After promulgating its authority over a 200-mile EEZ
soon after Independence, in accordance with the United
Nations Law of the Sea, the Namibian Government
promulgated the Sea Fisheries Act “To provide for the
conservation of the marine ecology and the orderly ex-
ploitation, conservation, protection and promotion of
certain marine resources; for that purpose to provide for
the exercise of control over sea fisheries; and to pro-
vide for matters connected therewith” (Anon. 1992).
Namibia became a signatory of The Rome Decla-
ration on the Implementation of the Code of Conduct
for Responsible Fisheries at the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO 1995) Minis-
terial Meeting on Fisheries, 1999. Subsequently, the leg-
islation pertaining to fisheries management was up-
dated with the promulgation of the Marine Resources
Act, 2000 (Anon. 2000). Namibia was also a signatory
to the Reykjavík Declaration on Responsible Fisheries
in the Marine Ecosystem, which marked the formal
adoption of a commitment to ecosystem approaches to
fisheries management at a global level (FAO 2001).
The above demonstrates the commitments Namibia
has made to the management of its living marine natu-
ral resources and provides clear signs that, together with
the principles of sustainability, ecosystem interactions
are to be taken into account. In 1998, an “Ecosystem
Analysis Section” was activated within the Directorate
of Resource Management of the Ministry of Fisheries
and Marine Resources, with a threefold agenda: 
• study the effects of environmental variability on the
living marine resources;
• explore the potential of biological indicators of
changes in the ecosystem;
• develop guidelines and provide scientific advice to
implement an ecosystem approach to fisheries
management.
At the end of 1998, a project entitled “Trophic inter-
actions in the Benguela ecosystem and their implica-
tions for multi-species management of fisheries” was
initiated in Namibia by FAO, funded by the Government
of Japan (as part of the Implementation of the Kyoto
Conference Plans of Action). The main objective of
this project was to construct an improved, updated,
dynamic ecosystem model of the trophic flows of the
northern Benguela, to facilitate the development and
evaluation of multispecies management techniques
for the marine resources of Namibia and possibly the
entire Benguela.
Ecosystem model of the northern Benguela
The first phase of the project involved the collection
and analysis of dietary data from selected important
predators (in particular Cape fur seals, shallow-water
and deep-water Cape hake, and other predatory species),
as well as some basic information on forage fish
species (myctophids and pelagic goby). A workshop
was convened in August 1999 to collate published and
unpublished data on the different components of the
ecosystem, with the help of various experts (Roux
and Shannon 2000). The likely biases and levels of
uncertainty of each dataset were discussed at the
workshop, to guide and facilitate the balancing process
of the resulting ecosystem model. The modelling ap-
proach used was ECOPATH with ECOSIM (EwE;
Christensen and Pauly 1992, Walters et al. 1997).
Local scientists and international experts at the work-
shop agreed on how the structure of existing ECO-
PATH models of the region (Jarre-Teichmann et al .
1998, Shannon and Jarre-Teichmann 1999) should be
modified in order to tailor the model to the fishing
scenarios to be tested. The major product of this phase
of the project was an updated ECOPATH model that
described trophic flows in the northern Benguela in
the late 1990s, following the anomalous environmental
conditions experienced during 1994 and early 1995
(Roux and Shannon 2000). The model has been further
updated and modified in line with the generic struc-
ture and parameterization agreed upon for trophic
models of upwelling ecosystems (Moloney and Jarre
2003, Moloney et al. subm.). Model inputs, parameter
estimates and summary statistics of this updatedmodel
are given in the Appendix.
The sensitivity of model outputs to uncertainty in the
input parameters of the main fish groups was explored
using that routine in EwE. The model was most sensi-
tive to variability in the input parameters of the Cape
hake groups (Shannon et al . 2001). In addition, the
Roux & Shannon: EAF in the Northern Benguela2004 83
84 Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela
African Journal of Marine Science 26
2004
Table I: Selected results from simulations undertaken to investigate the ecosystem implications of multispecies management strate-
gies (from Shannon et al.2001). Unless otherwise stated, simulations were run for 50 years, starting from the balanced model
for the period 1995–1999 when biomasses of many species were at very low levels. Default vulnerability parameter values
(mixed flow control) were assumed, except where otherwise indicated (sensitivity tests)
Management strategy Estimated outcome for selected groups
(% change in biomass)
Closure of fisheries to investigate potential for stock recovery
Closure of sardine fishery All model groups: between –4 and +4
Sardine: +40
Closure of demersal trawl hake fishery M. paradoxus: +63
M. capensis: +39
Forage fish stocks: –12 to –14
Predators on forage fish: –14 to –16
Moratorium on catches of small and large horse mackerel Large horse mackerel: +38
M. capensis: +7
Fur seals: +9
Seabirds: –84
Most other groups: between –5 and +5
Implications of altered fishing strategies for potential competitors
Opening of fishery on pelagic goby (e.g. removing 50% of goby production) Goby: –87
Anchovy: +51
Sardine: +27
Small horse mackerel: +21
M. capensis: –25
M. paradoxus: +16
Increasing fishing mortality of small and large horse mackerel (e.g. fourfold) Sardine: negligible effects
Seabirds: +70
Large pelagics: +35
M. capensis: –30
M. paradoxus: +17
Onset of fishery removing 50% of gelatinous zooplankton production Anchovy: +22
Cephalopods and horse mackerel: +33
Large pelagic fish and whales: +42
M. capensis: +20
M. paradoxus: +33
Pelagic goby: –8
Seabirds: –6
Implications of altered fishing strategies for predator and prey groups
50% reduction in Cape fur seal population Anchovy: +16
Sardine: +10
Most other groups: between –4 and +5
95% reduction in Cape fur seal population Sardine: +21
Moratorium on sealing Fur seals: +8
Other model groups: between –2 and +2
Moratorium on sealing (assuming top-down control by seals of their prey) Fur seals: +53 (after 75 years)
Sardine: –16 (after 75 years)
Anchovy: –17 (after 75 years)
Fourfold increase in small horse mackerel fishing mortality (purse-seine Horse mackerel: –18
fishery) M. capensis: –8
M. paradoxus: –2
Seabirds: +13
Goby: +8
Total catches (all groups): +20  
Fourfold increase in large horse mackerel (mid-water trawls) fishing mortality Ho rse mackerel: –88
M. capensis: –30
M. paradoxus: +17
Goby: +33
Seabirds: +59
Total catches (all groups): –39
(continued)
ECORANGER routine of EwE was used to seek alter-
native balanced models, by drawing input parameter
values in a Monte Carlo fashion from specified ranges
and frequency distributions of input parameters (Chris-
tensen and Walters 2004). The difficulty in balancing
the original model was reflected by the paucity of al-
ternative possible models found using this routine,
showing that the foodweb of the northern Benguela
simulated in the model is tightly constrained (Shannon
et al. 2001).
Dynamic simulations of the possible ecosystem ef-
fects of altered fishing strategies can be explored
using EwE. Given hypothetical changes in fishing
mortalities, the rates of change in biomass of model
groups over time can be simulated. Based on the “for-
aging arena” concept, dynamic consumption rates are
calculated according to assumptions of flow control
from predator to prey, prey-handling times, relative
feeding times of predators and prey, etc. (Christensen
and Walters 2004). In EwE, consumption by a model
group changes over time, depending on the model
abundances of the prey groups as well other preda-
tors that may be competing with the group. In this
way, possible ecosystem implications of competition
and indirect trophic effects can be explored.
In the second phase of the project, scenarios of
different plausible fishing strategies were identified.
Fisheries scenarios selected for testing were grouped
thematically. Hereafter, examples of simulations un-
dertaken in each of the fishing scenario categories
are presented to illustrate the kind of questions and
interactions that can be explored using an approach
such as EwE applied in the Namibian context, and to
highlight the types of results that could prove helpful
in providing qualitative inputs for fisheries manage-
ment advice. All simulations presented below were
undertaken using ECOSIM. Simulations were run for
50 years or until equilibrium was reached, assuming
default model parameter settings. In particular, the de-
fault vulnerability setting for mixed flow control was
assumed. In upwelling systems in particular, the sys-
tem’s dynamics are sensitive to the assumptions of
flow control between groups at mid-trophic levels
(Cury et al. 2000, Shannon et al. 2000). The effects
of assumptions of top-down versus bottom-up control
on the outputs of the latter scenario were tested. In
EwE, the vulnerability parameter is used to deter-
mine the type of control between groups (Christensen
and Walters 2004). Flow control is expressed by
means of the vulnerable and non-vulnerable portions
of a prey group to each of its predators. 
The results from some of the original simulations
(Shannon et al. 2001) to address important questions
are given below as indications of the direction and rela-
tive magnitude of the changes. However, they should
not be treated in a quantitatively predictive sense, be-
cause the models have recently been updated and re-
vised (see Appendix). In addition, uncertainties
around input model parameter values need further
consideration.
Given the present structure of the ecosystem, what
is the potential for recovery to historical levels of the
main depleted stocks by altering the fishing strategy
on those stocks? 
Several examples of simulations of this nature were
run, ranging from slight changes in present fishery mor-
talities to complete closure of some fisheries (Table I).
In the case of sardine, a simulated closure of the fishery
had little effect on the other components of the sys-
tem, whereas the sardine stock only increased moder-
ately, to about 1% of the maximum estimated biomass
before the stock collapsed in the early 1970s.
A hypothetical closure of the hake fishery resulted
in larger increases in the target stocks than for sardine.
The effect was more pronounced for large M. para-
doxus than for large M. capensis. This is not surprising
because M. paradoxus is more heavily exploited.
Other likely consequences of such closure are declines
in forage fish stocks and a decline in other predators
such as seabirds and pelagic-feeding demersals that
depend on those forage fish species.
A modelled moratorium on horse mackerel catches
resulted in a moderate increase in the biomass of
large horse mackerel and tended to favour some horse
mackerel predators, such as M. capensis and fur seals,
but caused seabirds to decline dramatically (Table I).
These extreme examples illustrate that, given the
present assumed trophic structure of the northern
Benguela, altering the major fisheries would not cause
a recovery of the small pelagics to the levels seen 40
years ago, suggesting that the original foodweb in the
region may have been altered dramatically. They also
suggest that trophic effects may have large indirect
Roux & Shannon: EAF in the Northern Benguela2004 85
Table I: (continued)
Exploring interactions between different fisheries
Fourfold increase in fishing mortality of large M. capensis Large M. capensis: –36
Small M. capensis: –27
M. paradoxus: between –5 and +5
Dolphins: +17
Seabirds: +22
consequences on some components of the system
(e.g. seabirds).
What is the potential strength of competitive inter-
actions between stocks, and how would a target stock
be affected by altered fishing strategies on potential
competitors? 
Since the collapse of the Namibian sardine stock,
concerns have been voiced about the potential effect
of perceived competitors in limiting sardine stock re-
covery. For example, heavy exploitation of anchovy
was encouraged at the time of the sardine collapse, in
the forlorn hope that this would promote the rapid re-
covery of sardine (Shelton 1992). The only significant
result of this management attempt was the rapid de-
cline of the Namibian anchovy stock in the late 1970s.
Subsequently, similar suggestions have been made
about juvenile horse mackerel and goby, with the hope
that a decrease in those stocks would favour the re-
covery of sardine.
In order to test these effects, opening a fishery on
pelagic goby was modelled. An extreme scenario
(Table I) resulted in a drastic decline of the goby bio-
mass, effectively “vacating the niche”. However, the
net effect on sardine was not a dramatic recovery, but
a modest increase as a result of increased predation
pressure. The side effects of such a strategy were impor-
tant for other stocks. M. capensis (preying on pelagic
goby) declined, whereas M. paradoxus increased,
favoured by reduced predation by M. capensis as well
as increases in some of the prey of small and large M.
paradoxus (zooplankton and mesopelagics). 
Similarly, several scenarios affecting horse mackerel
were simulated, by increasing the fishing mortality of
small horse mackerel (targeted by purse-seiners),
large horse mackerel (targeted by midwater trawlers)
or both. Again, curbing a perceived competitor did
not result in any substantial recovery of the sardine
stock. However, potentially important negative effects
of some strategies that were not modelled in this
study could have devastating effects on the very
stocks that such scenarios would be expected to bene-
fit. For example, the directed purse-seine fishery for
horse mackerel takes sardine as a bycatch. As a con-
sequence, a drastic increase in this fishery could im-
pact sardine stocks negatively. Similarly, the midwater
trawl fishery could potentially impact many species
(particularly sardine and both species of small hake).
Given the large biomass of gelatinous zooplankton
in the northern Benguela, this group may have poten-
tially important competitive as well as predatory effects
on other stocks. The simulated removal of jellyfish had
positive effects on most groups (Table I). However,
understanding of the ecological role of gelatinous zoo-
plankton in Namibian waters is limited at present. For
example, the impact of the group on fish recruitment
(particularly as a result of predation on eggs and larvae)
could be considerable (Möller 1984, Boyer et al. 2001).
What trophic effects would altered fishing on preda-
tors or prey of a given stock have on its trajectory, as
well as on the rest of the system?
The possibility of limiting the potential predation
pressure (particularly by seals) on a fished stock to
improve its recovery has been suggested for many of
the world’s depleted stocks, including those of the
Benguela (Shaughnessy 1985, Butterworth et al. 1988,
Wickens and Shelton 1988). Several scenarios of re-
duction of the Cape fur seal population were modelled
to examine the potential benefit for commercially im-
portant prey species (e.g. sardine and hake). Following
a 50% reduction in seal biomass, effects on other
groups were small (Table 1). Even by increasing seal-
ing to the point of reducing the seal population to only
5% of its initial estimate, the benefit to the sardine
stock was only moderate. However, Plagányi and Butter-
worth (2004) note that, as a consequence of the un-
derlying functional response assumptions in the model,
simulated responses to reduced top predator abun-
dance can be dampened. Furthermore, in the absence
of age-structured parameterization (e.g. of growth effi-
ciency), ECOSIM is likely to underestimate the eco-
system effects of top predator removal (Aydin 2004).
Opposite scenarios were tested to estimate the po-
tential impact of a reduction or closure of sealing on
different prey species. Again, there were only small
changes: model biomasses of all other groups were
retained within 2% of their original values. However,
equilibrium seal biomass was sensitive to the vulner-
ability parameter setting. Under the closure to sealing
scenario, there were large increases in model seal
biomass when top-down control by seals of their prey
was assumed (Table I). 
Different scenarios of altered fishing levels on
horse mackerel, which is an important prey of Cape
hake in the northern Benguela (Traut 1996), were
modelled to test their potential effects on the hake
stocks (Table I). Hake were negatively impacted when
a heavier fishery on small horse mackerel was simu-
lated, although the modelled decline of M. capensis
was greater than that of M. paradoxus. This could be a
consequence of the larger contribution of horse mack-
erel to the diet of M. capensis (Traut 1996, Shannon
et al. 2001). Again, this scenario did not take into ac-
count the potentially serious detrimental effect of sar-
dine bycatch (bycatch was not modelled in this study).
A similar increase in fishing mortality of large
horse mackerel (targeted by midwater trawlers) caused
the horse mackerel stock to collapse, with implications
for its predators and prey (Table I). Simulations such
as these illustrate that ecosystem effects of altered
fishing scenarios are often not of a magnitude or even
86 Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela
African Journal of Marine Science 26
2004
a direction that would be expected from consideration
of predator-prey relationships in the absence of indi-
rect trophic effects. 
What are the interactions between the different fish-
eries?
Several of the examples given above highlight in-
teractions between different fisheries in the northern
Benguela. Additional scenarios were also considered,
in particular involving the fishery on the two species
of Cape hake. Both stocks are exploited by the same
fishery, but M. paradoxus, which is preyed upon by
M. capensis (Punt and Leslie 1995), dominates the
hake catches. Possible effects of differential changes in
fishing pressure on those two species were examined
(Table I).
In another scenario, by decreasing fishing mortality
of large M. capensis and M. paradoxus while differ-
entially increasing that of small hake, the overall hake
catches could be kept virtually constant (although at
the cost of a decrease in the size of fish in the catch),
whereas the biomass of large M. paradoxuscould expe-
rience considerable gains. Although not very realistic,
these scenarios nevertheless illustrate how the interplay
of size-selection devices and depth limits to fishing
could differentially affect the two Cape hake stocks,
with little change caused to other groups.
Implications for an ecosystem approach in the
northern Benguela
The simulations presented provide some insights
into the nature of the trophic interactions between the
different biotic groups of the northern Benguela, and
how the effects of fishing can propagate through the
ecosytem as a result of trophic interactions. At present,
Namibian fisheries, like all other major marine capture
fisheries around the world, are managed largely on a
single-species basis, in which it is assumed that the
dynamics of any given stock are purely a function of
the characteristics of that stock. The results presented
here give an indication of the weaknesses and potential
pitfalls of that assumption. For example, the develop-
ment of a fishery for goby, while probably bringing
new economic returns to Namibia, could result in re-
ductions (of 10% or more for the scenarios presented
here) in the biomass of M. capensis. This reduction
in biomass could be anticipated to lead to a reduction
in long-term yield of the resource. Similarly, an in-
crease in fishing mortality on small horse mackerel is
likely to lead to a reduction in abundance of both Cape
hake stocks, particularly M. capensis. In the ongoing
development of an optimum strategy for sustainable
utilization of the northern Benguela ecosystem and
effective management of Namibia’s fisheries, inter-
specific interactions need to be considered. The eco-
system modelling approach taken here is one source
of potentially useful inputs to this process. 
Several important ecosystem issues need to be ad-
dressed, which are not formally considered in manage-
ment decisions at present:
• effect of fishing on non-target components of the eco-
system;
• interactions between different fisheries;
• changes in ecosystem state (regime shifts, compe-
tition between small pelagic fish species);
• species of conservation concern;
• biodiversity issues;
• impact of opening new fisheries (or closing fisheries)
on the system;
• protected areas, including fishing restriction zones
(e.g. 200-m depth limit for trawlers).
THE W AY FORW ARD
Simulations such as those examined in this study, in-
cluding the consideration of uncertainties, give valu-
able insight into the nature and possible implications
of the trophic interactions in the northern Benguela
ecosystem and how the effects of fishing may propagate
through the ecosystem as a result of the interactions.
However, given the many uncertainties in the way any
ecosystem model represents the interactions and how
ecosystem structure might respond to changes, it
would not be possible to use such a model as a pre-
dictive tool at this stage. Additional analyses and al-
ternative models are needed to reduce the uncertainties
and to test the underlying assumptions. Ecosystem
models can constitute a useful synthesis of current
understanding of the trophic structure of the ecosystem
and can highlight critical gaps in knowledge of the
system, so helping to set research priorities.
The future role of multispecies models in the man-
agement framework applied to northern Benguela
marine resources was considered by Roux and Shannon
(2002), and future steps to take this process further
were recommended. These include in particular the
incorporation of new research data into the models, and
motivations for specific projects in order to address
some of the critical uncertainties. In addition, the
concept of ecosystem management needs to be for-
malized in the northern Benguela through a consulta-
tive process between the fishing industry, fisheries
researchers and managers, as well as other stakeholders.
Stock assessment is an imprecise discipline, for
many reasons. Multispecies stock assessment and
forecasting involve even more uncertainties than single-
species projections, and are therefore intrinsicallyless
precise. However, the information generated by multi-
species and ecosystem models, when appropriately
Roux & Shannon: EAF in the Northern Benguela2004 87
interpreted, is valuable on a different scale. Ecosystem/
multispecies models can give important insights into
the realities of ecosystem dynamics, predator-prey and
competition interactions, among other multispecies ef-
fects. Such effects cannot be adequately addressed
by means of traditional approaches that consider a
single stock in isolation from others and the ecosystem
with which it interacts, either directly or indirectly.
Traditional single-stock assessment tools usually re-
main the best available tools for short-term tactical
management decisions. They have the advantage of in-
corporating more details on age and size structure of
the fished stocks and on gear selectivity than is nor-
mally possible in ecosystem models, and they provide
reference points for single stocks. However, to address
some of their shortcomings, they can be complemented
by multispecies approaches, especially for medium
and long-term, strategic fisheries management. Eco-
system models are also valuable tools to assist in set-
ting multispecies objectives for fisheries management,
for testing the robustness of long-term changes in
management strategies and policies, and for assessing
the ecological sustainability of present and future
fisheries management scenarios. 
It is clear that incorporating ecosystem (multispecies)
considerations into the Namibian fisheries manage-
ment framework has become a necessary target.
Ecosystem modelling provides the basis from which
a structured framework can be developed to implement
an EAF in Namibia. Good multispecies models can
provide measurable ecosystem-based indicators and
be used in fisheries management to assess biodiversity
and conservation issues, as well as ecological sus-
tainability. A goal of future work to improve the ad-
vice given to managers should therefore be to com-
bine the insights gained from both single-stock and
ecosystem/multispecies approaches for ecologically
sustainable fisheries management.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge the contributions to this
project by Astrid Jarre, the support and guidance of
Kevern Cochrane, and helpful inputs from Coleen
Moloney and Philippe Cury. We thank all participants
to the workshops and the first author’s Namibian col-
leagues for contributing not only their time, but data
and knowledge. Coleen  Moloney, Kevern Cochrane
and Ben van Zyl are thanked for their constructive
comments on earlier drafts, and the Government of
Japan, the BENEFIT team, the Nansen Programme
(NORAD, Norway) and IDYLE (IRD, France) for fi-
nancial support.
LITERATURE CITED
AGENBAG, J. J. and L. V . SHANNON 1988 — A suggested physi-
cal explanation for the existence of a biological boundary at
20°38´S in the Benguela system. S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 6:
119–132.
ANON. 1845 — The African guano trade. Being an account of the
trade in guano from Ichabo, and other places on the African
coast. Naut. Mag. 11: 617–666.
ANON. 1998 — Sea Fisheries Act 1998 (Act No. 29 of 1992).
Government Gazette, Namibia 493: 57 pp.
ANON. 2000 — Marine Resource Act 2000 (Act No. 27 of 2000).
Government Gazette, Namibia 2458: 4 pp.
ARMSTRONG, M. J. and R. M. THOMAS 1995 — Clupeoids. In
Oceans of Life off Southern Africa, 2
nd ed. Payne, A. I. L. and
R. J. M. Crawford (Eds). Cape Town; Vlaeberg: 105–121. 
A VERY , G. 1985 — Late Holocene use of penguin skins: evidence
from a coastal shell midden at Steenbras Bay, Lüderitz Penin-
sula, South West Africa–Namibia. Ann. S. Afr. Mus. 96:
55–65.
AYDIN, K. Y . 2004 — Age structure or functional response?
Reconciling the energetics of surplus production between
single-species models and ECOSIM. In Ecosystem
Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela. Shannon,
L. J., Cochrane, K. L. and S. C. Pillar (Eds). Afr. J. mar. Sci.
26: 289–301.
BAKUN, A. 1993 — The California Current, Benguela Current
and Southwestern Atlantic shelf ecosystems: a comparative
approach to identifying factors regulating biomass yields.
In Large Marine Ecosystems – Stress, Mitigation and
Sustainability. Sherman, K., Alexander, M. and B. Gold (Eds).
Washington D.C.; American Association for the Advance-
ment of Science: 199–224.
BAKUN, A. 1996 — Patterns in the Ocean: Ocean Processes and
Marine Population Dynamics. University of California Sea
Grant Program, San Diego, California, USA, in cooperation
with Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas de Noroeste, La
Paz, Mexico: 323 pp.
BEST, P. B. 1973 — Seals and sealing in South and South West
Africa. S. Afr. Shipp. News Fishg Ind. Rev.28(12): 49, 51, 53,
55, 57.
BEST, P. B. and G. J .B. ROSS 1986 — Catches of right whales from
shore-based establishments in southern Africa, 1792–1975.
Rep. int. Whalg Commn Special Issue 10: 275–289.
BEST, P. B. and G. J. B. ROSS 1995 — Whales and whaling. In
Oceans of Life off Southern Africa, 2
nd ed. Payne, A. I. L. and
R. J. M. Crawford (Eds). Cape Town; Vlaeberg: 315–338.
BEST, P. B. and P. D. SHAUGHNESSY 1979 — An independent
account of Captain Benjamin Morrell’s sealing voyage to
the south-west coast of Africa in the Antarctic, 1828/29. Fish.
Bull. S. Afr. 12: 1–19.
BIANCHI, G., CARPENTER, K. E., ROUX, J-P., MOLLOY , F. J.,
BOYER, D. and H. J. BOYER 1999 — Field Guide to the
Living Marine Resources of Namibia . FAO Species Identi-
fication Guide for Fishery Purposes , 2
nd ed. Rome; FAO:
265 pp.
BOYER, D. C., BOYER, H. J., FOSSEN, I. and A. KREINER
2001 — Changes in abundance of the northern Benguela
sardine stock during the decade 1990–2000, with com-
ments on the relative importance of fishing and the environ-
ment. In A Decade of Namibian Fisheries Science . Payne,
A. I. L., Pillar, S. C. and R. J. M. Crawford (Eds). S. Afr. J.
mar. Sci. 23: 67–84.
BOYER, D. C. and I. HAMPTON 2001 — An overview of the living
marine resources of Namibia. In A Decade of Namibian
Fisheries Science. Payne, A. I. L., Pillar, S. C. and R. J. M.
Crawford (Eds). S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 23: 5–35.
88 Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela
African Journal of Marine Science 26
2004
BUTTERWORTH, D. S., DUFFY , D. C., BEST, P. B. and M. O.
BERGH 1988 — On the scientific basis for reducing the
South African seal population. S. Afr. J. Sci. 84: 179–188.
CHRISTENSEN, V . and D. PAULY 1992 — ECOPATH II – a soft-
ware for balancing steady-state ecosystem models and calcu-
lating network characteristics. Ecol. Model. 61: 169–185. 
CHRISTENSEN, V . and C. J. W ALTERS 2004 — ECOPATH
with ECOSIM: methods, capabilities and limitations. Ecol.
Model. 172: 109–139. 
CRAWFORD, R. J. M., CRUICKSHANK, R. A, SHELTON, P. A.
and I. KRUGER 1985 — Partitioning of a goby resource
amongst four avian predators and evidence of altered trophic
flow in the pelagic community of an intense, perennial up-
welling system. S. Afr. J. mar. Sci.3: 215–228.
CRAWFORD, R. J. M., DYER, B. M., CORDES, I. and A. J.
WILLIAMS 1999 — Seasonal pattern of breeding, population
trend and conservation status of bank cormorants Phala-
crocorax neglectus off south-western Africa. Biol. Conserv.
87: 49–58.
CURY , P., BAKUN, A., CRAWFORD, R. J. M., JARRE, A., QUI-
ÑONES, R. A., SHANNON, L. J. and H. M. VERHEYE
2000 — Small pelagics in upwelling systems: patterns of
interactions and structural changes in “wasp-waist” ecosys-
tems. ICES J. mar. Sci. 57: 603–618.
CURY , P. and L. J. SHANNON 2004 — Regime shifts in upwelling
ecosystems: observed changes and possible mechanisms in
the northern and southern Benguela. Prog. Oceanogr. 60:
223–243. 
DA VID, J. H. M. 1995 — Seals. In Oceans of Life off Southern
Africa, 2
nd ed. Payne, A. I. L. and R. J. M. Crawford (Eds).
Cape Town; Vlaeberg: 288–302. 
DU TOIT, M., BOERE, G. C., COOPER, J., DE VILLIERS, M. S.,
KEMPER, J., LENTEN, B., SIMMONS, R. E., UNDER-
HILL, L. G., WHITTINGTON, P. A. and O. BYERS (Eds)
2002 — Conservation Assessment and Management Plan
for Southern African Coastal Birds. Cape Town; Avian
Demography Unit & Apple Valley: IUCN/SSC Conservation
Breeding Specialist Group: 194 pp.
EDEN, T. E. 1846 — The Search for Nitre and the True Nature of
Guano, Being an Account of a Voyage to the South-West
Coast of Africa. London; Groombridge and Sons: 136 pp.
FAO 1995 — Code of Conduct for Responsible Fisheries . Rome;
FAO: 41 pp.
FAO 2001 — Report of the Reykjavík Conference on Responsible
Fisheries in the Marine Ecosystem,  Reykjavík, Iceland,
October 2001. FAO Fish. Rep. 658: 135 pp.
FEARON, J. J., BOYD, A. J. and F. H. SCHÜLEIN 1992 —
Views on the biomass and distribution of Chrysaora hyso-
scella (Linné, 1766) and Aequorea aequorea (Korskal,
1775) off Namibia, 1982–1989. Scientia Mar. 56: 75–85.
GAMMELSRØD, T., BARTHOLOMAE, C. H., BOYER, D. C.,
FILIPE, V . L. L. and M. J. O’TOOLE 1998 — Intrusion of
warm surface water along the Angolan-Namibian coast in
February–March 1995: the 1995 Benguela Niño. In Benguela
Dynamics: Impacts of Variability on Shelf-Sea Environments
and their Living Resources . Pillar, S. C., Moloney, C. L.,
Payne, A. I. L. and F. A. Shillington (Eds). S. Afr. J. mar.
Sci. 19: 41–56.
HEYMANS, J. J., SHANNON, L. J. and A. JARRE 2004 — Changes
in the northern Benguela ecosystem over three decades: 1970s,
1980s and 1990s. Ecol. Model. 172: 175–195.
JARRE-TEICHMANN, A., SHANNON, L. J., MOLONEY , C. L.
and P. A. WICKENS 1998 — Comparing trophic flows in
the southern Benguela to those in other upwelling ecosys-
tems. In Benguela Dynamics: Impacts of Variability on Shelf-
Sea Environments and their Living Resources. Pillar, S. C.,
Moloney, C. L., Payne, A. I. L. and F. A. Shillington (Eds).
S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 19: 391–414.
KANKONDI, R. 1994 — Namibia: building a modern fishing in-
dustry. Namibia Brief 18: 21–25.
KEMPER, J., ROUX, J-P., BARTLETT, P. A., CHESSELET, Y . J.,
JAMES, J. A. C., JONES, R., WEPENER, S. and F. J. MOL-
LOY 2001 — Recent population trends of African penguins
Spheniscus demersus in Namibia. In A Decade of Namibian
Fisheries Science. Payne, A. I. L., Pillar, S. C. and R. J. M.
Crawford (Eds). S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 23: 429–434. 
KINAHAN, J. 1990 — The impenetrable shield: HMS Nautilus
and the Namib coast in the late eighteenth century. Cimbe-
basia 12: 23–61.
MÖLLER, H. 1984 — Reduction of a larval herring population by
a jellyfish predator. Science 224: 621–622.
MOLONEY , C. L. and A. JARRE (Eds) 2003 — Comparison of
marine upwelling ecosystems: an ECOPATH calibration
exercise. Workshop Report, October–November 2002,
University of Cape Town; IDYLE, IRD: 23 pp.
MOLONEY , C. L., JARRE, A., ARANCIBIA, H., BOZEC, Y-M.,
NEIRA, S., ROUX, J-P. and L. J. SHANNON (submitted)
— Comparing the Benguela and Humboldt marine ecosys-
tems with indicators derived from inter-calibrated models.
ICES J. mar. Sci.
OELOFSEN, B.W. 1999 — Fisheries management: the Namibian
approach. ICES J. mar. Sci.56: 999–1004.
PLAGÁNYI, É. E. and D. S. BUTTERWORTH 2004 — A critical
look at the potential of ECOPA TH with ECOSIM to assist
in practical fisheries management. In Ecosystem Approaches
to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela . Shannon, L. J.,
Cochrane, K. L. and S. C. Pillar (Eds). Afr. J. mar. Sci. 26:
261–287.
PUNT, A. E. and R. W. LESLIE 1995 — The effects of future
consumption by Cape fur seal on catches and catch rates of
the Cape hakes. 1. Feeding and diet of the Cape hakes
Merluccius capensis and M. paradoxus. S. Afr. J. mar. Sci.
16: 37–55.
RICHARDS, R. and T. DU PASQUIER 1989 — Bay whaling off
southern Africa, c. 1785–1805. S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 8: 231–250.
ROUX, J-P. 2003 — Risks. In Namibia’s Marine Environment .
Molloy, F. and  T. Reinikainen (Eds). Windhoek; Directorate
of Environmental Affairs, Ministry of Environment and
Tourism: 137–152.
ROUX, J-P., BEST, P. B. and P. E. STANDER 2001 — Sightings
of southern right whales (Eubalaena australis) in Namibian
waters, 1971–1999. J. Cetacean Res. Mgmt Special issue 2:
181–185.
ROUX, J-P., KEMPER, J., BARTLETT, P. A., DYER, B. M. and
B. L. DUNDEE (in press) — African penguins Spheniscus
demersus recolonize a formerly abandoned locality in
Namibia. Mar. Ornith.
ROUX, J-P. and  L. J. SHANNON 2000 — Report on the northern
Benguela ecosystem modelling workshop, Swa-kopmund,
Namibia, August 1999. BENEFIT/FAO/COOPERATIVE
PROGRAMME GCP/INT/643/JPN 2.2: 16 pp.
ROUX, J-P. and  L. J. SHANNON 2002 — Some considerations
for ecosystem management of the northern Benguelaecosys-
tem. Workshop report, Swakopmund, May 2001. BENE-
FIT/FAO/COOPERATIVE PROGRAMME GCP/INT/
643/JPN 2.5: 42 pp.
SHANNON, L. J. and A. JARRE-TEICHMANN 1999 — A
model of trophic flows in the northern Benguela upwelling
system during the 1980s. S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 21: 349–366.
SHANNON, L. J., CURY , P. and A. JARRE 2000 — Modelling
effects of fishing in the southern Benguela ecosystem.
ICES J. mar. Sci.57: 720–722.
SHANNON, L. J., ROUX, J-P. and A. JARRE 2001 — Report on
progress to January 2001: exploring multispecies management
options using the completed northern Benguela ecosystem
model. BENEFIT/FAO/COOPERATIVE PROGRAMME
GCP/INT/643/JPN 2.4: 56 pp.
SHANNON, L. V . 1985 — The Benguela ecosystem. 1. Evolution
Roux & Shannon: EAF in the Northern Benguela2004 89
of the Benguela, physical features and processes. In Oceano-
graphy and Marine Biology. An Annual Review 23. Barnes,
M. (Ed.) Aberdeen; University Press: 105–182.
SHANNON, L. V ., BOYD, A. J., BRUNDRIT, G. B. and J.
TAUNTON-CLARK 1986 — On the existence of an El
Niño-type phenomenon in the Benguela system. J. mar.
Res. 44: 495–520.
SHAUGHNESSY , P. D. 1982 — The status of seals in South
Africa and Namibia. In Mammals in the Seas. FAO Fish. Ser. 5
4: 383–410.
SHAUGHNESSY , P. D. 1984 — Historical population levels of
seals and seabirds on islands off southern Africa with special
reference to Seal Island, False Bay. Investl Rep. Sea Fish.
Res. Inst. S. Afr. 127: 61 pp.
SHAUGHNESSY , P. D. 1985 — Interactions between fisheries and
Cape fur seals in southern Africa. In Marine Mammals and
Fisheries. Beddington, J. R., Beverton, R. J. H. and D. M.
Lavigne (Eds). London; George Allen and Unwin: 119–134.
SHELTON, P. A. 1992 — Detecting and incorporating multi-
species effects into fisheries management in the North-
West and South-East Atlantic. In Benguela Trophic
Functioning. Payne, A. I. L., Brink, K. H., Mann, K. H.
and R. Hilborn (Eds). S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 12: 723–737. 
STUTTAFORD, M. 1994 — Recovering from the near collapse of
a rich resource. Focus on fisheries and research. Namibia
Brief 18: 12–17.
TRAUT, P. J. 1996 — Diet and annual consumption for the Cape
hakes on the Namibian Shelf, with special reference to
cannibalism. M. Phil. thesis, University of Bergen: 66 pp.
V AN DER WESTHUISEN, A. 2001 — A decade of exploitation
and management of the Namibian hake stocks. In A Decade
of Namibian Fisheries Science. Payne, A. I. L., Pillar, S. C.
and R. J. M. Crawford (Eds). S. Afr. J. mar. Sci. 23: 307–315.
V ASKE, B., MÜLLER, H., BABAY AN, V ., KOLAROV , P., PRO-
DANOV , K., WYSOKI´
NSKI, A., PAPADOPOL, N. C. and
C. MAXIM 1989 — Stock assessment and catch projec-
tions for Cape horse mackerel in ICSEAF Divisions 1.3 +
1.4 + 1.5. Colln scient. Pap. int. Commn SE. Atl. Fish.
16(2): 178–186.
VENTER, G. E. 1988 — Occurrence of jellyfish on the west coast
of South West Africa/Namibia. In Long-term Data Series
Relating to Southern Africa’s Renewable Natural Resources.
MacDonald, I. A .W. and R. J. M. Crawford (Eds). Rep. S.
Afr. natn. Scient. Progms 157: 56–61.
W ALTERS, C., CHRISTENSEN, V . and D. PAULY 1997 —
Structuring dynamic models of exploited ecosystems from
trophic mass-balance assessments. Revs Fish Biol. Fish. 7:
139–172. 
WICKENS, P. A., DA VID, J. H. M., SHELTON, P. A. and J. G.
FIELD 1991 — Trends in harvests and pup numbers of the
South African fur seal: implications for management. S.
Afr. J. mar. Sci. 11: 307–326.
WICKENS, P. A. and P. A. SHELTON 1988 — Report on the
1987 Benguela Ecology Programme series of workshops
on seal-fishery interactions. Rep. Benguela Ecol. Progm. S.
Afr. 14: 31 pp.
90 Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela
African Journal of Marine Science 26
2004
The ECOPATH model used in the simulations is fully
described by Shannon et al. (2001). The area consid-
ered was the shelf from about 20 to 600 m depth, and
from the Orange River in the south to 15°S off southern
Angola (the approximate average latitude of the Angola
–Benguela Front). The resulting area encompassed
by the model was 186 500 km
2, and included the distri-
bution of the small pelagic stocks in southern Angola
(particularly sardine), but excluded littoral communities
(and rock lobster), as well as deep-water stocks (in
particular orange roughy).
For the dynamic simulations, the species groups
were aggregated into 28 compartments, including four
groups for the two hake species (small and large for
each), two groups of cetaceans (toothed whales and
dolphins in one group, baleen whales in another) and
an additional group of forage fish to distinguish the
small pelagic community near the Orange River
(mainly anchovy from the South African stock).
Similarly, the fishing fleets were disaggregated by
fish groups for the dynamic simulations, and a “squid
fishery” was introduced (there was no directed squid
fishery in the northern Benguela in the mid-1990s,
and squid catches were a bycatch in other fisheries).
Also note that the “demersal fishery” in Table. App III
consists of the demersal trawl fisheries (for hake,
monkfish and sole) and the demersal longline fishery
(targeting hake), but not the deep-water trawl fishery
(targeting orange roughy).
The model was subsequently updated with the in-
corporation of new diet information and aggregated
following Moloney and Jarre (2003).
Roux & Shannon: EAF in the Northern Benguela2004 91
APPENDIX
Specifications of the ECOPATH model for the northern Benguela for the late 1990s
App.Table I:  Basic estimates and basic inputs (bold) in the balanced ECOPATH model of the northern Benguela for the late 1990s
Biomass P/B Q/B EE P/QGroup TL (tons km–2
(year–1 ) (year –1 ) (proportion) (proportion)year–1 )
Phytoplankton 1 .00 203.664 35.70 – 0.644 – 000
Microzooplankton 2.06 0 3.192 482.000 1 928.000 0.999 0.250
Mesozooplankton 2.53 17.5 0 40.000 133.333 0.999 0.300
Macrozooplankton 2.61 19.989 13.000 31.707 0.999 0.410
Gelatinous zooplankton 3.23 245.6600 0 0.44 1.467 0.151 0.3 00
Macrobenthos 1.51 192.111 1.2 10 .000 0.999 0.120
Sardine 2.65 000.443 1.35 14 .000 0.999 0.096
Anchovy 3.03 00.150 1.8 18 .000 0.959 0.1 00
Pelagic goby 3.22 17.368 1.8 12 .000 0.999 0.150
Mesopelagics 3.56 0 9.575 1.23 12.3 0.999 0.1 00
Cephalopods 3.99 1.935 5.000 15.000 0.999 0.333
Other small pelagics 3.52 7.995 0.958 9.349 0.930 0.102
Small horse mackerel 3.56 4.429 1.2 10 .000 0.999 0.120
Large horse mackerel 3.56 5.362 0.8 5.333 0.606 0.15 0
Large pelagics 4.57 0.188 0.5 5 .000 0.276 0.1 00
Small M. capensis 4.03 2.068 2.000 13.333 0.999 0.150
Large M. capensis 4.50 3.328 1.228 7.824 0.934 0.157  
Large M. paradoxus 4.31 1.894 1.14 7.278 0.666 0.157  
Benthic-feeding demersals 3.59 2.681 1 .000 5.000 0.970 0.2 00
Pelagic-feeding demersals 3.97 1.341 1 .000 5 .000 0.975 0.2 00
Chondrichthyans 3.35 0.36 0.5 3.333 0.667 0.15 0
Seabirds 4.36 0.004 0.156 120.3 .000 0.608 0.001  
Seals 4.65 0.253 0.29 18.25 0.171 0.016  
Cetaceans 4.29 0.019 0.15 7.418 0.000 0.020
Detritus 1 .00 840.000 – 00 – .000 0.555 – 0 00
TL: Trophic level
P/B: Production/biomass
Q/B: Consumption/biomass
EE: Ecotrophic efficiency
P/Q: Production/consumption
92 Ecosystem Approaches to Fisheries in the Southern Benguela
African Journal of Marine Science 26
2004
App.Table II:  Diet matrix of the balanced ECOPATH model for the northern Benguela in the late 1990s. Predators are numbered along the horizontal axis
Prey
Proportion of prey in diet
2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 
1. Phytoplankton 0.47 0.5 0.6 0.02  0.56 0.33 0.007   0.007    
2. Microzooplankton 0.06 0.5    0.08 0.04    0.006    
3. Mesozooplankton   0.4 0.62  0.18 0.31 0.255 0.6 0.02 0 0.774 0.7 0.15   0.1    0.18  0.003  0.05 0
4. Macrozooplankton    0.12  0.18 0.32 0.413 0.4 0.54 0 0.170 0.3 0.65  0.2 0 0.4 0.1 0.3 0 0.06 0.5 0 0.043  0.416
5. Gelatinous zooplankton    0.04       0.026    
6. Macrobenthos     0.08   0.325     0.1 0 0.01 0.4 0 0.4
7. Sardine          0.005      0.02  0 0. 0.01 0.01 0.038 0 0. 0.009
8. Anchovy          0.001      0 .00 00, 0 0. 0.01 0.149 0 0. 0.005
9. Pelagic goby          0.123   0.08  0.05 0.5 0.4 0.07  0.04 0.03 0.465 0.4 0.066
10. Mesopelagics          0.123   0.02  0.13 0 0. 0.1 0.26 0.03 0.04 0.03 0.05 0 0.1
11. Cephalopods          0.01 0 0.30 0.1 0 0. 0.07 0.27 0.15 0.1 0 0.045 0 0. 0.254
12. Other small pelagic          0.068    0.08 0 0. 0.1 0.14 0.03 0.04 0.07 0.083 0 0. 0.004
13. Small horse mackerel          0.1 00 0.03  0.1     0.005 0.1 0.05 0
14. Large horse mackerel 00. 0.01 0.02 0.02  0.1 0.043 
15. Large pelagics      000. 0.003  0.019
16. Small M. capensis 0.02  0.1 0.01    0.002 0.2
17. Large M. capensis 0.010 0.03  0.1 0.03 0.03  0 00. 0.052 0.2 0.024
18. Large M. paradoxus 0.05  0 0. 0.03 0.02 0 00. 0.046  0.024
19. Benthic-feeding demersals 00. 0.08 0.04  0.05
20. Pelagic-feeding demersals                0.1 0 00. 0.04 0.01 0.01 0.02 0.015 0 0.
21. Chondrichthyans 0.10
22. Seabirds 0.003
23. Seals 0 00. 0.001 0.033
24. Cetaceans
25. Detritus 0.47   0.2 0 0.05      0.017    0.1 0 0.16
Import     0.87          
Roux & Shannon: EAF in the Northern Benguela2004 93
App.Table III: Average landings estimated for the period 1995–1999 for the different fisheries considered in the balanced ECOPATH
model of the northern Benguela for the late 1990s
Group
Average landings (tons km–2 )
Pelagic Midwater Demersal Tuna Linefish Sealing Squid Crab  
Macrobenthos 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Sardine 0.189 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Anchovy 0.01 1 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Pelagic goby 0.046 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Cephalopods 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0 .01
Other small pelagics 0.03 1 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Small horse mackerel 0.345 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Large horse mackerel 0 .001 1.307 0.02 1 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Large pelagics 0 .001 0.004 0 .001 0.009 0.004 0 .001 0.001 0.01
Large M. capensis 0.001 0.001 0.267 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Large M. paradoxus 0.001 0.001 0.455 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Benthic-feeding demersal 0 .001 0.001 0.083 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Pelagic-feeding demersal 0 .001 0.041 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.01
Seals 0 .001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.001 0.005 0 .001 0 .01
Total 0.62 1 1.352 0.825 0.009 0.004 0.005 0.001 0.01  
App.Table IV: Summary statistics from the northern Benguela
ecosystem model for the period 1995–1999
Parameter Model output
(ton km–2 year–1 )
Total biomass (excluding detritus) 00 741.509*
Sum of all consumption 12 009.35 0
Sum of all exports 2 682.454
Sum of all respiratory flows 6 259.718
Sum of all flows into detritus 5 514.971
Total system throughput 26 46
Sum of all production 10 194
Net system production 1 011.087
Total catches 2.826
Mean trophic level of the catch 3.710
* tons km
–2
View publication statsView publication stats