Annual Report
ALASKA SEA GRANT 
2023–2024
IN THIS REPORT
3Who we are  .  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Healthy coastal ecosystems ............ 5
Sustainable fisheries and aquaculture  . . . . 8
Resilient communities and economies  . . 12
Environmental literacy and 
w
orkforce development . . . . . . . . . . . . . .17
Fellowship programs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .20
Research trainees  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .24
Faculty and staff  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .25
Advisory committee  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
By the numbers  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27
THANK YOU TO ALL OUR PHOTOGRAPHERS
Front cover Dawn Montano/Alaska Sea Grant (Kachemak Bay) . P 3 Alaska Sea Grant fa culty and staff by Dave Partee/Alaska Sea Grant (Kachemak Bay) .  
P 4 courtesy of Ginny Eckert . P 5 courtesy of Dawn Montano ( Turnagain Arm) . P 6 (top) courtesy of Jake Cohen (Kodiak Ar chipeligo), (middle and bottom) 
Julie Matweyou/Alaska Sea Grant (Kodiak) . P 7 Biz Wal lace/Alaska Sea Grant (top Homer, middle and bottom Whitter) . P 8 courtesy of Allie Co nrad (Bare 
Island) . P 9 Jessica W hitney/University of Alaska Fairbanks ( Juneau) . P 10 (top and middle) Dawn Montano/Alaska S ea Grant (Sitka), (bottom) Molly Cain/
Alaska Sea Grant (Sitka) . P 11 (top and middle) courtesy of Z ach Stamplis, (bottom) courtesy of NOAA Fisheries . P 12 Melissa Good/Alaska Sea Grant  
(Bethel) . P 13 (top and middle) Ashley D unker/Alaska Sea Grant (Nome), (bottom) Gay Sheffield/Alaska Sea Grant (Nome) . P 14 (top) Ginny Eckert/
Alaska Sea Grant (Haines), (middle) Gabe Dunham/Alaska Sea Grant (Bristol Bay), (bottom) image by Ralf Schick from Pixabay . P 15 (top) Sean Kell y/
Alaska Sea Grant (Kwethluk), (bottom) Davin Holen/Alaska Sea Grant (Chevak) . P 16 (top) Dawn Montano/Alaska Sea Gr ant (Sitka), (middle) Davin 
Holen/Alaska Sea Grant (Kodiak), Tav Ammu/Alaska Sea Grant (Cordova) . P 17 courtesy of Carrie S tander (Valdez) . P 18 (top) Leigh Lubin/Alaska S ea 
Grant (Valdez), (middle and bottom) Carrie Stander (Valdez) . P 19 (top and middle) T av Ammu/Alaska Sea Grant (Dillingham), (bottom) Melissa Good/
Alaska Sea Grant . P 20 (top) Dawn Montano/Alaska Sea Gr ant, (middle and bottom) Molly Cain/Alaska Sea Grant . P 21 all photos cour tesy of the fellow .  
P 22 (top) courtesy of Kit Cunningham, (bottom) courtesy of Nick Mills . P 23 all photos b y Brooke Carney/Alaska Sea Grant (Anchorage) . P 24 (left) 
courtesy of Dana Bloch (Southeast Alaska), (middle) courtesy of Noelle Helder (Beaufort Sea), (bottom) Jessica Whitney/University of Alaska Fairbanks 
(Kachemak Bay) . P 25 all photos by Alaska Sea Grant . P 26 Dawn Montano/Alaska Sea Gr ant . Back co ver Melissa Good/Alaska Sea Grant . 
UA is an affirmative action/equal opportunity employer, educational institution and provider and prohibits illegal discrimination against any individual: www.alaska.edu/nondiscrimination.
3
WHO WE ARE
 Alaska Sea Grant is one of 34 Sea Grant programs 
supported by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 
Administration in coastal and Great Lakes states 
that encourage the wise stewardship of our marine 
resources through research, education, outreach and 
technology transfer .
Alaska Sea Grant is a collaboration between NOAA 
and the University of Alaska Fairbanks and has been 
supporting healthy coastal resources, economies, and 
communities in Alaska for over 50 years . Our staff  
and Marine Advisory Program agents and specialists 
who live and work in Alaska’s coastal communities 
carry out this mission through research, education, 
and outreach . n
NOME
FAIRBANKS
ANCHORAGE
DILLINGHAM
KODIAK PETERSBURG
JUNEAU
V ALDEZ
CORDOV A
4
LETTER FROM THE DIRECTOR
Dear friends and partners,
As we close out another remarkable year at Alaska Sea Grant, I want to 
reflect on the significant achievements and progress we’ve made together . This  
has been a year of growth, collaboration, and innovation, and I’m incredibly 
proud of the hard work and dedication of our team, partners, and community 
members across the state and beyond .
One of the highlights was the record number of events we hosted, designed 
to facilitate learning and exchange among Alaskans and between Alaskans 
and colleagues from all over the world . Fr om regional conferences to specialized 
workshops and training programs, these gatherings brought together a diverse range of experts, stakeholders, and 
community members to address challenges and opportunities facing Alaska’s coastal communities and shared by 
colleagues . The enthusiasm and engagement at these events underscore the commitment we all share in sustaining 
Alaska’s marine and coastal resources .
Our team grew with the addition of faculty and staff in Anchorage, Cordova, Juneau, and Kodiak . These talented  
individuals bring fresh perspectives, skills, and a passion for Alaska’s marine environments . Their co ntributions will 
be essential as we address emerging issues and expand our programs . W e’re excited to have them onboard and look 
forward to the work we will accomplish together .
This year saw the expansion of our Alaska Sea Grant State Fellowship and Community-Engaged Fellowship 
programs . Through these initiatives, we are fostering the next generation of leaders committed to working with 
communities to address environmental and resource management challenges . These f ellows are engaging with 
Alaskans, providing valuable insights and capacity to enhance local resilience in the face of change .
Several efforts supported greater community engagement and leadership . W e piloted a program to provide seed grants 
to support enhanced community-academic partnerships . Thr ough this initiative, we’re supporting reciprocal, collab-
orative efforts between researchers and local communities and facilitating co-development of research questions . W e 
provided seven awards to communities to help tackle marine debris . These pr ojects are a testament to the power of 
grassroots efforts and the importance of community-driven solutions to environmental problems .
As we look forward to 2025, I am filled with hope and excitement for the continued growth of our programs and 
partnerships . I want to thank eac h of you for your unwavering support and commitment to the work we do . T ogether, 
we are making a lasting difference for Alaska’s coastal communities and marine environments .
Sincerely,
 
Ginny L . Eckert, PhD 
Alaska Sea Grant Director
HEALTHY COASTAL ECOSYSTEMS
6
Healthy coastal ecosystems
ADDRESSING HARMFUL ALGAL 
BLOOMS AROUND KODIAK
Harmful algal blooms (HABs) have been a persistent issue off the 
Kodiak archipelago, with toxins from species such as Alexandrium 
catenella posing serious health risks . Alexandrium produces saxitoxin, 
a neurotoxin which can accumulate in shellfish, and can cause severe 
illness or death if consumed . The pr evalence of these blooms is likely 
to increase with climate change, leaving rural communities at par-
ticularly high risk from HABs due to the importance of subsistence 
shellfish harvests and lack of access to emergency medical services .
To address this growing concern, the five-year project Monitoring 
and Event Response for Harmful Algal Blooms (MERHAB) has been 
launched . This federally funded initiative joins NOAA with Alaska 
Sea Grant, the University of Alaska, and the Kodiak Area Native 
Association (KANA) .
Field work in 2024 included a 12-day science cruise, focusing on 
bays and nearshore waters around tribal villages . Jake Cohen,  an 
Alaska Sea Grant State Fellow with KANA, is developing a long-
term plan for ocean-acidification sampling . He emphasiz ed the need 
for comprehensive environmental monitoring as communities adapt 
to climate change .
Mekia Bushell is a research fellow working with the NOAA 
National Centers for Coastal Ocean Science (NCCOS) Harmful 
Algal Bloom Forecasting Branch and is serving her appointment at 
the Kodiak Seafood and Marine Science Center (KSMSC) . Alaska 
Sea Grant and NCCOS have a partnership investigating and 
mitigating the impacts of harmful algal blooms . Bushell is w orking 
on HAB forecasting and paralytic shellfish toxin monitoring 
capacities in Kodiak . She co nducts weekly phytoplankton sampling 
and toxin tests across traditional harvesting sites, helping to map 
Alexandrium distributions in Chiniak Bay .
As Alaska’s maritime environment transforms from the impacts of a 
changing climate, this collaboration will be vital to creating an equi-
table transition to sustainable and resilient coastal communities . n
CLEAN HARBORS PROGRAM 
GROWS WITH HELP FROM 
STATE FELLOW
Whether working, playing, or traveling, time on the water is a way 
of life for many Alaskans . Smal l-boat harbors are vital, offering eco-
nomic opportunities in tourism and shipping, supporting commer-
cial and subsistence fishing, and serving as centers for cultural and 
recreational activities .
The Alaska Clean Harbors (ACH) program unites harbor managers, 
communities, and boaters to minimize environmental impacts and 
promote sustainable practices . This v oluntary, non-regulatory pro-
gram operates statewide, helping harbors reduce pollution and waste .
Alaska Sea Grant State Fellow Biz Wallace worked to coordinate 
the ACH program and expand its reach during her fellowship . She  
visited participating harbors this year to understand their challenges 
and offer solutions . She a dmired the dedication of harbor manag-
ers and communities to work alongside ACH to provide practical 
clean harbor solutions like pet waste stations and oil spill prevention 
signage .
Alaska now has three certified harbors—Juneau and Seward recerti-
fied in 2023 and Yakutat achieved certification in 2024 . V aldez and 
Homer plan to recertify, while Dillingham, Dutch Harbor, Kodiak, 
and Whittier aim for firstw-time certification . T o gain certifica-
tion, facilities must complete a self-assessment and ACH checklist, 
including regulatory requirements and best practices for pollution 
prevention and waste reduction . ACH has intr oduced a new tiered 
certification plan—Silver, Gold, and Platinum—with requirements 
tailored to each harbor’s resources . 
Initiated in 2007 with support from the Alaska Department of 
Environmental Conservation and the Cook Inlet Regional Citi-
zens’ Advisory Council, ACH provides free technical assistance and 
resources to help harbor staff protect Alaska’s waters . n
7
Healthy coastal ecosystems

8
Sustainable fisheries and aquaculture
SUSTAINABLE FISHERIES AND AQUACULTURE
9
Sustainable fisheries and aquaculture
SEAWEED GENETICS WORKSHOP 
DRAWS SCIENTISTS FROM 
ACROSS 
THE US
The Alaska Seaweed Genetics Workshop was held in Juneau to 
address information needs for preserving genetic diversity of sea-
weed as the kelp mariculture industry grows . Spo nsored by Alaska 
Sea Grant and Alaska Fisheries Development Foundation with 
funding support from the Exxon Valdez Oil Spill Trustee Council’s 
Mariculture Research and Restoration Consortium, the workshop 
brought together geneticists to synthesize current knowledge and 
guide policies regulating the broodstock of seaweed used to seed 
farms .
Presentations examined seaweed genetics around the country on 
topics including population genetics of kelp, selective kelp breeding, 
gametophyte cultivation and seedbanking, and heat stress tolerance 
of kelps in changing oceans . Discussions explor ed how this infor-
mation may be applied in Alaska .
Research indicates that genetic diversity of seaweed has been sig-
nificantly reduced as a result of excessive exploitation of wild habitat 
combined with vegetative farm expansion . As a prec aution to 
protect genetic diversity in seaweed populations, the Alaska Depart-
ment of Fish and Game created the 50–50 Rule for the State of 
Alaska . This regulation mandates that sorus tissue for mariculture 
operations must be collected from more than 50 parent individuals 
from within 50 kilometers of the outplanting site . 
With these rules in place and only a few kelp hatcheries in the state, 
it can be temporally and economically costly to grow seaweed in 
Alaska . Alaska has receiv ed significant funding to grow from a $1 
million to a $100 million industry in the next 20 years . The ideas  
exchanged during the workshop are helping researchers, farmers, 
and regulators address these important details while supporting the 
growing industry . n

10
Sustainable fisheries and aquaculture
Wake/f_ield Fisheries
Symposium
 CONFERENCE ADDRESSES 
SHIFTING FISHERIES 
DISTRIBUTIONS
The 33rd Lowell Wakefield Fisheries Symposium was held in Sitka 
in April 2024 . The thr ee-day conference, hosted by Alaska Sea 
Grant, brought together more than 60 fishery researchers, manag-
ers, and community partners to explore political, jurisdictional, and 
management structures for adapting to environmental changes and 
shifting species distributions in high latitudes . 
The symposium opened with keynote speaker Greta Pecl, professor 
of marine ecology at the University of Tasmania . Pec l highlighted 
key questions for climate-driven marine species redistribution in 
the context of fisheries, ecology, natural resource management, and 
social science . This was f ollowed by research presentations and panel 
discussions on shifting fish and shellfish distributions, modeling, 
fisheries sustainability, adapting management structures, and the 
human dimensions of shifting resources .
The Wakefield Symposium series plays a vital role in advancing 
fisheries science in Alaska, addressing issues that are often unique to 
the region . It serv es as a forum for exchanging information on biol-
ogy, management, economics, and processing related to various fish 
species and complexes . Additio nally, it provides an informal setting 
for scientists from high-latitude countries to discuss their research . 
For the 2024 gathering, participants traveled from across Alaska 
and other parts of the United States, as well as from Canada, Nor-
way, and Australia, to share case studies and compare approaches .
Alaska Sea Grant has coordinated the Lowell Wakefield Fisher-
ies Symposium series since 1982, in partnership with the Alaska 
Department of Fish and Game, NOAA Alaska Fisheries Science 
Center, North Pacific Fishery Management Council, and North 
Pacific Research Board . This y ear marked the return of the sympo-
sium series after a five-year hiatus . n
11
Sustainable fisheries and aquaculture
NEW FISH AGING METHOD 
PROMISES FASTER RESULTS
Alaska Sea Grant-funded researchers are testing a new method 
to streamline the process of determining fish age using a method 
called Fourier transform near-infrared spectroscopy (FT-NIRS) . 
Zach Stamplis, a University of Alaska Fairbanks graduate student, 
is working with Professor Franz Meuter on the project to develop a 
model that estimates the daily age of juvenile Pacific cod accurately 
and quickly .
Determining fish ages is crucial for researchers and resource man-
agers to understand fish biology and inform management decisions . 
Fish ear bones, called otoliths, grow throughout a fish’s life and 
display rings similar to tree rings, aiding in age determination . Juve-
nile otoliths can show daily growth increments, helping researchers 
calculate hatch dates, but the process typically used to analyze them 
is time-consuming .
To create an FT-NIRS calibration model, intact otoliths are 
scanned by a spectrometer . Near-infr ared light reveals the otolith’s 
chemical composition, allowing researchers to pair spectral data 
with daily ages obtained through traditional methods to build a 
model for estimating age using new spectroscopic scans .
The project is also testing the FT-NIRS calibration models on 
juvenile cod from other parts of the Gulf of Alaska to assess 
how environmental variables may affect the models . If successful, 
FT-NIRS could become a valuable tool for monitoring juvenile fish 
populations and assessing the impacts of climate change on Alaska’s 
commercial fisheries . n

RESILIENT COMMUNITIES AND ECONOMIES
Resilient communities and economies
13
CONFERENCE FOCUSES  
ON RAPID CHANGE IN  
WESTERN ALASKA
The 16th Western Alaska Interdisciplinary Science Conference took 
place in April 2024, hosted by Alaska Sea Grant and the Univer-
sity of Alaska Fairbanks Northwest Campus . The four-day event 
gathered over 130 scientists, specialists, and community members to 
discuss the theme “Western Alaska in transition .”
Every year, WAISC provides a forum for bringing urban and rural 
Alaskans together to a regional hub community to share knowledge 
and science across disciplinary and cultural boundaries . The event 
featured three plenary presentations . N ome’s Gail Smithhisler 
spoke on efforts to revitalize Indigenous languages, climate scientist 
Rick Thoman discussed research, monitoring and public service 
during a time of rapid change in Western Alaska, and Nome’s Chris 
Olanna, along with his father Ralph Olanna, provided perspectives 
on the integration of local and Indigenous Knowledge with tech-
nology to adapt to a changing environment .
Nearly 50 presentations were given on research topics that per-
tained to Western Alaska . O verarching themes included community 
science, ocean ecology, harmful algae, science in transition, educa-
tion, and resource development .
“People commented that they enjoyed how locally focused the con-
ference was,” said Tav Ammu, Alaska Sea Grant Marine Advisory 
Program agent for Dillingham and an organizer of the event . “Part 
of the reason we move WAISC around different parts of Western 
Alaska is to encourage the interactions between local scientists and 
researchers and those from other areas .”  
A highlight was students from Nome-Beltz High School presenting 
original research on harmful algal blooms, finding detectable but 
safe levels in saffron cod, raising questions about winter ecosystem 
changes due to warming waters . n

14
Resilient communities and economies
ESTABLISHING COMMUNITY 
PARTNERSHIP DEVELOPMENT 
GRANTS
Alaska Sea Grant is committing more than $90,000 to fund four 
new projects supporting the development of community-based 
research partnerships and engagement of communities on research 
teams . The projects are being funded through the Community 
Partnership Development competitive funding opportunity, a 
pilot initiative from Alaska Sea Grant providing resources to build 
partnership capacity for research .
“A commonly identified barrier to conducting community-engaged 
research is accessing funding for researchers and community 
members to build relationships which could lead to grant 
opportunities,” said Molly Cain, Alaska Sea Grant’s associate 
director for research . 
The new projects begin this fall with the goal of preparing 
community-academic teams to collaborate on the design of 
research projects related to improving understanding and 
management of Alaska’s coastal, marine, and watershed resources .
Areas of interest include effects of beaver expansion on fish in the 
Arctic, genetic approaches for monitoring salmon, linking fisheries 
heritage research to pathways for sustainable fishing, and landslide 
hazard monitoring . P roject participants include University of 
Alaska Fairbanks, Chilkat Indian Village, Project Kutí, Alaska 
EPSCoR, Chignik Intertribal Coalition, Alutiiq Tribe of Old 
Harbor, and more . n
15
Resilient communities and economies
ENERGY RESILIENCE  
INITIATIVE LAUNCHED IN  
YUKON-KUSKOKWIM DELTA
A new energy resilience initiative is underway in Western Alaska, 
led by Alaska Sea Grant . The initiative focuses on advancing energy 
security, affordability, and resilience in the Yukon-Kuskokwim Delta 
(Y-K Delta) through the Climate Ready Workforce for Coastal Alaska 
project, developing a rural energy workforce strategy tailored to the 
region’s unique needs .
“There are a lot of energy infrastructure projects underway for rural 
and isolated communities in Alaska aiming to harness renewable 
energy resources such as wind and solar,” noted Sean Kelly, Climate 
Adaptation Specialist with Alaska Sea Grant . “The long-term suc-
cess of these projects hinges on how well community-level energy 
champions are supported and place-based energy education and 
training for local workforces are prioritized .”   
In February 2024, during the Alaska Forum on the Environment, 
Alaska Sea Grant brought together key figures in energy education 
and training, including Chris McConnell, director of the Alaska 
Network of Energy Education and Employment, Amanda Garvey 
of Sunstone Electric Company, and Annalise Klein of the Alaska 
Center for Energy and Power . Their discussions highlighted the 
critical barriers faced by rural Alaskan communities, while fostering 
partnerships between the organizations .
Through a series of semi-structured interviews with various state-
wide and regional energy researchers, professionals, and practi-
tioners, and site visits to assess local infrastructure, the initiative 
identified significant gaps and opportunities for improvement . Ea ch 
conversation deepens the commitment to empowering communities, 
ensuring they have the skills to manage their own energy resources . 
Through this project and the work of several collaborators, the Y-K 
Delta is on the path to becoming a model of energy independence 
and resilience . n

16
Resilient communities and economies
FOSTERING LOCAL RESILIENCE 
FOR FISHING COMMUNITIES
Climate change has dramatically impacted Gulf of Alaska fisher-
ies . The global phenomenon has led to fisheries disasters over the 
last several years, including declines in Chinook and other salmon . 
Fishery losses may be devastating for local economies that lack eco-
nomic diversity, maintain fishing-dependent food systems, and have 
multi-generational cultural fishing practices that cannot be replaced .
“Every fishing boat is a business, often a family business . Str ess 
to the fishery will impact business decisions and trickle down to 
households,” explained fisheries anthropologist Davin Holen, the 
coastal community resilience specialist with Alaska Sea Grant .
To address these challenges, Alaska Sea Grant is collaborating on 
the grassroots project Advancing Understanding of Climate Adapta-
tion and Resilience in the Gulf of Alaska Fishing Communities, orga-
nized by Marysia Szymkowiak at the NOAA Alaska Fisheries 
Science Center . This initiativ e helps communities in Sitka, Kodiak, 
and Cordova assess their vulnerabilities and plan for climate scenar-
ios through participatory workshops .
These workshops stand out for being led by local organizations 
deeply familiar with their communities and fisheries . Pr eliminary 
sessions have already taken place in Sitka, guided by the Alaska 
Sustainable Fisheries Trust, and in Kodiak, organized by the Alaska 
Marine Conservation Council . A wor kshop in Cordova is currently 
in the planning stages, and will be led by the Prince William Sound 
Science Center . n
ENVIRONMENTAL LITERACY 
AND WORKFORCE DEVELOPMENT
18
Environmental literacy and workforce development
YOUTH NATURE PROGRAM 
CONTINUES GROWTH
Now in its third year, the Coastal Connection Camps program 
provides educational summer activities for middle school students 
in Valdez and Seward, while training teachers and leaders for future 
camps . The program includes exploring the coastal environment, 
hands-on science, art, team building, and developing personal 
resilience .
“Parents in both communities have been thrilled that there is some-
thing productive and supervised for their kids to participate in over 
the summer,” said Leigh Lubin, educational specialist for Alaska 
Sea Grant and the camp’s architect .
Designed as a “camp-in-a-box,” the program equips leaders with the 
supplies needed to host camps in remote areas otherwise lacking the 
infrastructure to do so . This y ear, the Kenai Mountains-Turnagain 
Arm (KMTA) National Heritage Area trained 10 educators at a 
four-day workshop in Seward . Par ticipating organizations included 
the Prince William Sound Science Center and the Alaska SeaLife 
Center, both of which plan to incorporate aspects of the camps into 
their summer programs .
The Coastal Connection Camps have grown more than seven-fold, 
from serving seven children in 2022, to 50 children this summer 
across both communities . The N ational Park Service is now 
providing five years of funding to support the KMTA National 
Heritage Area in running the Coastal Connections program . This  
vital support will enhance the program’s reach and engagement, 
allowing more coastal Alaskan youth to cultivate foundational 
awareness and skills related to their local environment . 
With additional support from various partners, including the City 
of Valdez, the program aims to expand by offering Reconnection 
Camps for returning students, and counselor-in-training for high 
school youth . n
19
Environmental literacy and workforce development
SUPPORTING ALASKAN 
FISHERMEN IN TRAINING
Alaska Sea Grant offers fishery-related training programs to 
empower current and next generation of commercial fishermen . 
One such training combines classroom instruction with hands-on 
practice to provide U .S . Coast Guar d-accepted two-year safety 
certification . Par ticipants learn essential skills to respond to 
common injuries such as burns, broken bones, and hypothermia, 
using real-life scenarios from marine vessels .
In 2023, Alaska Sea Grant and its partners received over $240,000 
from NOAA Sea Grant for the AK On-Board: Young Fishermen 
Training and Apprenticeship Program . This two-year initiative 
draws on the strengths of each partner to assist with crew training, 
apprenticeships, and network-building .
“We’ve been working to train young fishermen in various ways 
for a while now,” said Gabe Dunham, Alaska Sea Grant Marine 
Advisory Program leader . “ This project will help us put all the pieces 
together for a truly impactful training program .”
To engage high school students, Alaska Sea Grant, in collaboration 
with the Bristol Bay Regional Career and Technical Education 
program, introduced a two-week intensive course covering fishing 
gear, vessel maintenance, safety training, marine first aid, and 
business planning . Pr oviding fisheries education in Bristol Bay is 
crucial for empowering local and Indigenous youth, ensuring they 
understand that this is their fishery and equipping them to invest in 
this vital industry .
Additionally, Alaska Sea Grant hosted a three-day workshop on 
oyster hatchery operations at the OceansAlaska Shellfish Hatch-
ery, bringing together trainees and experts to advance aquaculture 
education and sustainable resource management . The y also offered 
online classes in seafood direct marketing, responding to current 
market conditions and helping more than 40 participants explore 
new avenues for bringing their seafood to consumers . n

20
Environmental literacy and workforce development
CELEBRATING THE 10TH 
ANNIVERSARY OF THE ALASKA 
SEA GRANT STATE FELLOWSHIP
Celebrating its 10th year, the Alaska Sea Grant State Fellowship 
program offers a unique opportunity for early career profession-
als interested in the science and policy necessary for maintaining 
healthy marine, coastal, and watershed resources . Modeled af ter 
the successful Knauss Marine Policy Fellowship, this program 
offers hands-on experience in planning and implementing marine 
resource policies in Alaska .
The fellowship pairs students and recent graduates with host organi-
zations or agencies in Alaska for a 12-month paid position . P ast and 
present hosts include NOAA Fisheries Protected Resource Division, 
the Central Council of the Tlingit & Haida Indian Tribes of Alaska, 
and U . S . Geologic al Survey Alaska Science Center, among others  .
This program supports workforce development of Alaska’s emerging 
marine and coastal professionals, helping to launch impactful 
careers . With over 50 alumni, the program has grown from two 
fellows in its inaugural year to a cohort of 17 in 2024 . The program 
continues to nurture a new generation of leaders dedicated to 
Alaska’s marine resources . n

21
ALASKA SEA GRANT STATE FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
Class of 2024 
Jake Cohen
Alaska Sea Grant, 
Coastal Community 
Resilience Program
Michelle Dutro
NOAA Fisheries 
Protected Resources 
Division
Rachel French
Alaska Sea Grant, 
Mariculture
Maddie McArthur
UAF Institute of  
Northern Engineering
Mack Hughes
U.S. Geological 
Survey, Alaska Science 
Center
Jenna Kennedy
Alaska Mariculture 
Alliance
Phoebe Koenig
Southeast Conference
Angela Korabik
NOAA Fisheries, 
Alaska Fisheries 
Science Center
Noah Meyer
Central Council of 
the Tlingit & Haida 
Indian Tribes of Alaska
Addie Norgaard
UAF Alaska Center 
for Energy and Power
Alaina Plauché
North Pacific Fishery 
Management Council
Krystal Renta
NOAA Fisheries, Alaska 
Fisheries Science Center
Emily Reynolds
NOAA Fisheries, 
Alaska Aquaculture 
Program
Alyssa Sanchez
NOAA Fisheries, 
Habitat Conservation 
Division
Jenna Schlener
U.S. Geological 
Survey, Alaska Science 
Center
Alice Van 
Veenendaal
Alaska Sea Grant, 
Communications
Devanie White
NOAA Fisheries, 
Sustainable Fisheries 
Division

22
Environmental literacy and workforce development
Kit Cunningham
Nick Mills
TWO ALASKA SEA GRANT 
NOMINEES SELECTED AS 
KNAUSS FELLOWS
Two Alaska students were selected for the 2024 Sea Grant 
Knauss Marine Policy Fellowship program, one of the 
most prestigious marine policy fellowships in the country . 
Kit Cunningham and Nick Mills were chosen after being 
nominated for the positions by Alaska Sea Grant . They joined 
a class of 85 early career professionals from across the country 
to spend a year working with the government in Washington, 
D . C  . , on marine and coastal science, public administration, and 
policy issues .
Cunningham, a graduate student at the University of Alaska 
Fairbanks and employee for the Alaska Department of Fish 
and Game, was selected to join the legislative branch in U . S . 
Senator Lisa Murkowski’s office . Cunningham emp hasized 
that systemic change requires more than science alone, so 
she pursued the Knauss Fellowship in order to gain tools for 
creating legislation that instigates immediate action regarding 
marine conservation .
Mills earned a bachelor’s degree in wildlife biology and a 
master’s degree in public administration from the University 
of Montana . He was pla ced into the Office of the Assistant 
Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks at the U . S . 
Department of the Interior . Mil ls’ long-term goal is to advance 
as a policymaker and diver in a leadership role in the western 
United States . 
“When it comes to natural resource management and conser-
vation policy, I’ve embraced my role as a generalist,” says Mills . 
He points to the long-lasting benefit of consensus-driven 
policy as a takeaway from the Knauss Fellowship . n
Environmental literacy and workforce development
23
SUPPORTING UNDERGRADUATE 
STUDENTS THOUGH THE 
COMMUNITY-ENGAGED 
FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM
Alaska Sea Grant welcomed its fourth cohort of Community-
Engaged Fellows . This summer, five undergraduate students are 
working on projects that connect science with coastal communities 
through collaboration . 
“The fellows in the 2024 CEF cohort are an inspiring group,” said 
Brooke Carney, deputy director of Alaska Sea Grant . “They each 
have unique backgrounds and embody our mission to center the 
needs and interests of coastal communities .”
The fellows attended a two-day retreat in Anchorage focused on 
professional development and team building . They explored career 
pathways with former fellows, and engaged in outdoor activities like 
rafting and biking . Univ ersity of Alaska Anchorage professor Amy 
Bishop presented to the group and discussed food security in rural 
coastal communities and facilitated conversations on community 
engagement . 
The Alaska Sea Grant Community-Engaged Fellowship is part of 
a national initiative by the Sea Grant network, aimed at increasing 
representation in the coastal sciences . The program emphasizes 
community involvement, mentorship, cohort building, and develop-
ing professional skills . n
2024 CEF cohort: (back) Nels Ure, Brendan Hegarty
(front) Joi Gross, Leyla Thompson, Mary Simeon

24
ALASKA SEA GRANT RESEARCH TRAINEES
Dana Bloch MS oceanography 
Southeast Alaska trolling vessel ocean measurement program
Maeghan Connor MS wildlife biology and conservation  
Integrating emerging technologies with community-based 
observations to assess spotted seal ecology at terrestrial haul-outs 
in Arctic Alaska
Muriel Dittrich MS marine biology   
Development of cultivation protocols for the red seaweed, dulse, to 
support traditional food systems in Southeast Alaska
Elena Eberhardt MS fisheries 
Quantifying the influence of environmental conditions on 
potential trophic interactions and growth of juvenile sockeye 
salmon and threespine stickleback within Iliamna Lake
Sof Fox MS fisheries 
Evolutionary underpinnings of stress response in Pacific oysters
Elizabeth Mik’aq Lindley PhD fisheries  
Pink Arctic: patterns, processes, and consequences of increasing 
Pacific salmon in the high north
Riley O’Neil MS marine biology 
Do mariculture farms improve habitat for sea otter prey?
George Payne MS civil engineering 
Nature-based and community-engaged Arctic coastal protection
Ben Peterson MS biology 
Too big to ignore: Foraging strategies and competition between 
marine top predators in a rapidly changing Bering Sea
Emily Reynolds MS marine biology 
The relationship between oyster farms and their environment,  
a sea otter’s perspective
Zach Stamplis MS fisheries 
A transformative approach to rapidly assess critical life history 
and energetic responses of fish to environmental change
Student selection in progress 
Development of a non-lethal genetic-based method for aging 
Pacific halibut
25
ALASKA SEA GRANT FACULTY AND STAFF
Ginny Eckert
Director, Juneau
Tav Ammu
Marine Advisory 
Agent, Dillingham
Molly Cain
Associate Director for 
Research, Fairbanks
Brooke Carney
Deputy Director, 
Anchorage
James Crimp
Shellfish Mariculture 
Specialist, Juneau
Gabe Dunham
MAP Leader and 
Fisheries Specialist, 
Juneau
Ashley Dunker
Program and Event 
Coordinator, Kodiak
Quentin Fong
Seafood Marketing 
Specialist, Kodiak
Melissa Good
Mariculture 
Specialist, KSMSC 
coordinator, Kodiak
Davin Holen
Coastal Community 
Resilience Specialist, 
Anchorage
Trinda 
Huffman
Administrative 
Assistant, Anchorage
Arron Jones
Mariculture 
Technician, Kodiak
Sean Kelly
Climate Adaptation 
Specialist, Anchorage
Leigh Lubin
Marine Education 
Specialist, Valdez
Julie Matweyou
Marine Advisory 
Agent, Kodiak
Dawn Montano
Communications 
Project Manager, 
Fairbanks
Julie Parshall
Program 
Administrator, 
Fairbanks
Dave Partee
Technology and 
Communications, 
Fairbanks
Sunny Rice
Marine Advisory 
Agent, Petersburg
Chris Sannito
Seafood Technology 
Specialist, Kodiak
Marc Solano
Seafood Processing 
Workforce 
Development 
Coordinator, Kodiak
Gay Sheffield
Marine Advisory 
Agent, Nome
John Williams
Fisheries Workforce 
Specialist, Cordova
ALASKA SEA GRANT ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Jodie Anderson, Director 
UAF Institute of Agriculture,  
Natural Resources and Extension
Kaja Brix, Arctic Program Director  
NOAA Fisheries Alaska Region
Diana Evans, Deputy Director 
North Pacific Fishery Management Council
Nicole Kimball, Vice President 
Pacific Seafood Processors Association
Michael Kohan, (Chair) Science and Policy Director 
Sitka Salmon Shares
Jon Kurland, Alaska Regional Administrator 
NOAA National Marine Fisheries Service
Scott Lindsey, Regional Director  
NOAA National Weather Service
Angela Lunda, Assistant Professor of Education 
University of Alaska Southeast
Vera Metcalf, Director 
Eskimo Walrus Commission at Kawerak, Inc.
Hazel Nelson, Board of Directors 
Bristol Bay Native Corporation
Aaron Poe, Network Program Officer 
Alaska Conservation Foundation
Dave Reggiani, Aquaculture Expert 
Prince William Sound Aquaculture Corporation
Chris Siddon, Marine Fisheries Scientist 
Alaska Department of Fish and Game
Wanda Wahl, Director* 
UAF Bristol Bay Campus
Dee Williams, (Vice-chair) Deputy Regional Director 
US Geological Survey
Sheyna Wisdom, Executive Director 
Alaska Ocean Observing System
* Joined fall 2024
27
ALASKA SEA GRANT BY THE NUMBERS
Reporting data represents activities Feb. 1, 2023, to Jan. 31, 2024, which aligns with the National Sea Grant College Program’s reporting cycle.
Operating Revenue
45%
28%24.6%
2%
<1%
NOAA Omnibus and  
   supplements (federal)
University of Alaska  
   funds (includes match) 
Grants (non-Omnibus) 
Program income 
Donations  
   (cash and in-kind)
NOAA Omnibus and supplements (federal) $3,316,714
University of Alaska funds (includes match) $1,815,896
Grants (non-Omnibus) $2,059,025
Program income $155,382
Donations (cash and in-kind) $27,200
Expenditures
52%
14%
24%
9%
<1%
Outreach, education  
   and communications
Research and student 
   fellowships 
Program management 
State and Knauss  
   fellowships
Program development 
Outreach, education & communications $3,518,915
Research and student fellowships $1,595,527
Program management $959,059
State and Knauss fellowships $580,738
Program development $74,773
520
K–12 students  
educated  
in marine science
44 
K–12 educators 
trained
183  
Businesses  
sustained or created
$52,011,870 
Economic  
benefit
559 
Jobs sustained  
or created
246 
Fishermen/ 
processors trained
200 
Partners
42 
Events held
1,650
Event partipants
38 
Graduate students  
worked on Sea 
Grant–funded 
research 
6
Graduate students  
who got jobs
8,022 
Publications 
distributed
AK-ADMIN-114