NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-AFSC-178
 
A Comparison of the Bering Sea, 
Gulf of Alaska, and Aleutian Islands 
Large Marine Ecosystems Through 
Food Web Modeling 
by 
K. Aydin, S. Gaichas, I. Ortiz, D. Kinzey, and N. Friday U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
 
National Marine Fisheries Service
 
Alaska Fisheries Science Center
 
December 2007 
 
NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS 
The National Marine Fisheries Service's Alaska Fisheries Science Center 
uses the NOAA Technical Memorandum series to issue informal scientific and 
technical publications when complete formal review and editorial processing 
are not appropriate or feasible.  Documents within this series reflect sound 
professional work and may be referenced in the formal scientific and technical 
literature. 
The NMFS-AFSC Technical Memorandum series of the Alaska Fisheries 
Science Center continues the NMFS-F/NWC series established in 1970 by the 
Northwest Fisheries Center.  The NMFS-NWFSC series is currently used by 
the Northwest Fisheries Science Center. 
This document should be cited as follows: 
Aydin, K., S. Gaichas, I. Ortiz, D. Kinzey, and N. Friday. 2007. A 
comparison of the Bering Sea, Gulf of Alaska, and Aleutian Islands 
large marine ecosystems through food web modeling. U.S. Dep. 
Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-AFSC-178, 298 p. 
Reference in this document to trade names does not imply endorsement by 
the National Marine Fisheries Service, NOAA. 
NOAA Technical Memorandum NMFS-AFSC-178
 
A Comparison of the Bering Sea,
 
Gulf of Alaska, and Aleutian Islands
 
Large Marine Ecosystems Through
 
Food Web Modeling
 
by 
K. Aydin1, S. Gaichas1, I. Ortiz2, D. Kinzey2, and N. Friday1 
1
Alaska Fisheries Science Center
 
7600 Sand Point Way N.E.
 
Seattle, WA 98115
 
www.afsc.noaa.gov
 
2
University of Washington
 
School of Aquatic and Fisheries Sciences
 
1122 NE Boat St.
 
Seattle, WA 98105
 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 
Carlos M. Gutierrez, Secretary 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
Vice Admiral Conrad C. Lautenbacher, Jr., U.S. Navy (ret.), Under Secretary and Administrator 
National Marine Fisheries Service 
William T. Hogarth, Assistant Administrator for Fisheries 
December 2007 
This document is available to the public through: 
National Technical Information Service 
U.S. Department of Commerce 
5285 Port Royal Road 
Springfield, VA 22161 
www.ntis.gov  
Notice to Users of this Document 
This document is being made available in .PDF format for the convenience of users; however, the 
accuracy and correctness of the document can only be certified as was presented in the original hard 
copy format. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
Abstract 
Detailed mass balance food web models were constructed to compare ecosystem 
characteristics for three Alaska regions: the eastern Bering Sea (EBS), the Gulf of Alaska 
(GOA), and the Aleutian Islands (AI). This paper documents the methods and data used to 
construct the models and compares ecosystem structure and indicators across models. The 
common modeling framework, including biomass pool and fishery definitions, resulted in 
comparable food webs for the three ecosystems which showed that they all have the same apex 
predator—the Pacific halibut l ongline fishery. However, despite the similar methods used to 
construct the models, the data from each system included in the analysis clearly define 
differences in food web structure which may be important considerations for fishery 
management in Alaska ecosystems. The results showed that the EBS ecosystem has a much 
larger benthic influence in its food web than either the GOA or the AI. Conversely, the AI 
ecosystem has the strongest pelagic influence in its food web relative to the other two systems. 
The GOA ecosystem appears balanced between benthic and pelagic pathways, but is notable in 
having a smaller fisheries catch relative to the other two systems, and a high biomass of fish 
predators above trophic level (TL) 4, arrowtooth flounder and halibut. The patterns visible in 
aggregated food webs were confirmed in additional more detailed analyses of biomass and 
consumption in each ecosystem, using both the single species and whole ecosystem indicators 
developed here.  
iii 
 
 
Contents 
1	 Introduction ........................................................... 1
 
1.1	 Purpose and Background of Past Models ................................ 1
 
1.2	 Model Setting ...................................................... 3
 
1.2.1 Time scale .................................................... 3
 
1.2.2 Area description and maps ....................................... 3
 
1.2.3 Species breakdown and scale types ................................ 1 2
 
1 . 3	 N e w  I n f o r m a t i o n  a n d  I m p r o v e m e n t s  O v e r  P r e v i o u s  M o d e l s ................ 1 5
 
1.4 Outline of Result Types ............................................. 1 5
 
2 Methods ............................................................. 1 6
 
2 . 1 M o d e l i n g  F r a m e w o r k............................................... 1 6
 
2.1.1 Ecopath modeling ............................................. 1 6
 
2.1.2 Improvements over standard ecopath models ........................ 1 8
 
2.2	 Input Data and Parameter Estimation Methods ........................... 1 9
 
2.3	 Balancing Procedure with Data Quality Evaluation ....................... 2 0
 
2.4	 The Ecosense Routines: Estimating Uncertainty .......................... 2 1
 
2 . 5 A n a l y s i s  o f  M a s s - b a l a n c e d  M o d e l s .................................... 2 5
 
2.5.1 Visualizing and comparing ecosystem structure ...................... 2 5
 
 indicators and statistics ................................ 2 5
 2.5.2 Ecosystem
3 Results and Discussion ................................................. 2 7
 
3.1	 Quantitative Results, Model Balance, and Food Webs ..................... 2 7
 
data sources to achieve balanced models ................. 2 7
 3.1.1 Reconciling 
3.1.2 Visualizing the food webs and primary energy flows .................. 3 1
 
3 . 2	 S i n g l e  S p e c i e s  I n d i c a t o r s  a n d  S t a t i s t i c s................................. 3 8
 
3 . 3 E c o s y s t e m  I n d i c a t o r s  a n d  S t a t i s t i c s .................................... 5 5
 
3.3.1 Different ecosystem roles of Pacific cod ........................... 5 5
 
3.3.2 Consumption differences between ecosystems: forage base ............. 6 6
 
3.3.3 Trophodynamic comparisons of the EBS, AI, and GOA ............... 7 6
 
4 Summary and Conclusions ............................................. 1 0 7
 
5 Recommendations .................................................... 1 1 1
 
6 Appendix A: Description, Data Sources, and General Comparison for 
  Each Species Group Across Ecosystems ................................. 1 1 5
 
6.1	 Cetaceans ....................................................... 1 1 5
 
6 . 2	 S e a  O t t e r s  a n d  P i n n i p e d s ........................................... 1 2 2
 
6 . 3	 S e a b i r d s ........................................................ 1 2 8
 
6.4	 Fish (Includes cephalopods and forage fish) ............................ 1 3 6
 
6 . 5	 B e n t h i c  I n v e r t e b r a t e s .............................................. 1 8 1
 
6 . 6	 P l a n k t o n  a n d  D e t r i t u s.............................................. 1 9 5
 
6 . 7 P r i m a r y  P r o d u c e r s ................................................ 2 0 0
 
7 Appendix B: Detailed Estimation Methods ............................... 2 0 3
 
7 . 1	 B e n t h i c - P e l a g i c  f l o w s ............................................. 2 0 3
 
7.2	 Cetacean Biomass ................................................ 2 0 3
 
7.3	 Marine Mammal Production Rates ................................... 2 0 7
 
7 . 4	 M a r i n e  M a m m a l  C o n s u m p t i o n  R a t e s ................................. 2 0 8
 
7 . 5	 M a r i n e  M a m m a l  D i e t.............................................. 2 1 1
 
7 . 6	 S e a b i r d  B i o m a s s.................................................. 2 1 1
 
v 
7.7 Seabird Production Rates ........................................... 2 1 3
 
7 . 8 S e a b i r d  C o n s u m p t i o n  R a t e s  a n d  D i e t s................................. 2 1 3
 
7 . 9 F i s h  B i o m a s s .................................................... 2 1 5
 
7.10 Fish Production Rates ............................................. 2 1 6
 
7.11 Fish Consumption Rates ........................................... 2 1 7
 
7.12 Diet Queries for Fish .............................................. 2 1 9
 
7.13 Adult Juvenile Parameters .......................................... 2 2 0
 
7.14 Fisheries ........................................................ 2 2 1
 
7.14.1 Halibut hook and line fishery ............................... 2 2 1
 
7.14.2 Crab fleet, herring fleet, salmon fleet, and shrimp trawl fisheries . . . 222
 
7.14.3 Subsistence fishery ....................................... 2 2 2
 
7.14.4 Groundfish fisheries ...................................... 2 2 3
 
7.14.5 Discard and fishery comparisons between models .............. 2 2 6
 
8 Appendix C: Model Inputs and Results: Values of B, EE, PB, QB, TL, 
  Catch and Discards of Target and Non-target Species, and Diets
 in Each System. .................................................... 2 2 9
 
9 Citations ............................................................ 2 7 5
 
vi 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
1. Introduction 
1.1 Purpose and Background of Past Models 
Modeling food webs for use in large marine ecosystem (LME) fisheries management has been 
identified as a key element of an “ecosystem-based” approach to management (EPAP 1998). 
Such models provide a context for traditional single species approaches, rather than a 
replacement (Hollowed et al. 2000a), as they may identify key shifts in marine populations that 
arise out of changes in prey availability, predation mortality, or may identify climatic changes as 
they appear through shifts in these parameters. 
Moreover, such models, updated on 3-5 year intervals, may provide a basis for: i) the 
calculation of indicators specific to energy flow through modeled ecosystems; ii) an evaluation 
of sensitivity of species to perturbations in their predators or prey; iii) targeting research on 
ecologically important but poorly understood species; or iv) evaluation of management 
alternatives as they may affect long-term changes in food web structure. 
Here we present and compare the results of stock-scale food web models for the Bering Sea, 
Gulf of Alaska, and Aleutian Islands management regions (Fig. 1), focusing on the early to mid­
1990s (1990-1996). The mass-balance modeling methodology used for these food webs 
(Ecopath) was initially developed for the eastern Bering Sea region (Laevastu and Favorite 
1979). This work was generalized and extended by Polovina (1985) into a set of Microsoft 
Visual Basic routines, most recently updated and extended by Christensen and Pauly (1992) and 
Christensen and Walters (2004) as the free software package Ecopath. Ecopath allows for the 
consistent estimation and comparison of mass-balance results between multiple fisheries 
ecosystems. (While Ecopath is currently distributed with a dynamic modeling program, Ecosim, 
and a spatial analysis tool, Ecospace, in the package Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) we limit our 
analysis and discussion primarily to mass balance modeling except where noted.)  
Ecopath is designed to make extensive use of data as it is already collected for single-species 
fisheries management; base parameters, survey biomass estimates, age, weight, and mortality 
studies are supplemented with consumption rate data either from laboratory or shipboard 
experiments, to determine production and consumption rates for each species. Ecopath has been 
associated and packaged with a biomass dynamics/age structured simulation tool, Ecosim 
(Walters et al. 1997; Christensen and Walters 2004), which provides a theoretical framework for 
providing dynamic deterministic projections of changes in species and fisheries in response to 
changes in fishing or natural predation mortality. However, we believe that the use of this tool in 
the context of Alaskan fishery management decision making requires a more formal statistical 
estimation procedure for parameters than is currently available in EwE. Ecosim in its packaged 
form is only recommended for use in hypothesis exploration or first-order perturbation and 
sensitivity analyses as a supplement to other forecasting methods. 
For the eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Ecopath has previously been used to reconstruct food webs 
of the region as they existed in the early 1980s. Three initial efforts explored ecosystem changes 
from 1950 through 1980, including a major shift from what was thought to be a mammal-
dominated ecosystem to a more groundfish-dominated ecosystem (Trites et al. 1999), compared 
1
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
the geographically linked but structurally distinct eastern and western Bering Sea ecosystems 
(Aydin et al. 2002), and tested hypotheses regarding the decline of Steller sea lions in the North 
Pacific (NRC 2003). While clearly demonstrating the value of describing ecosystem interactions 
both in general and in an attempt to answer very specific conservation questions, each of these 
analyses also highlighted areas for improvement in the approach. For example, both Trites et al. 
(1999) and Aydin et al. (2002) had to aggregate taxonomic groups considerably, especially 
important forage species, zooplankton and phytoplankton, generally due to a lack of resolution in 
species specific data for a given time period or area (e.g., the 1950s and the western Bering Sea). 
In addition, geographic resolution in previous analyses was sometimes poorly defined. The 
Ecosim model used in NRC (2003) was based on the 1980s Bering Sea mass balance model from 
Trites et al. (1999), but the NRC (2003) analysis suffered from poor geographic precision in the 
inclusion of time series from both the Bering Sea and the Gulf of Alaska (GOA); for example, 
pollock biomass and recruitment time series from the Bering Sea were mixed with small pelagic 
and invertebrate time series derived from Anderson and Piatt (1999) which apply only to the 
GOA, and with the arrowtooth flounder time series from the GOA. It is difficult to interpret the 
NRC (2003) results for management in a specific ecosystem when the analysis was based on 
information from multiple ecosystems with demonstrably different dynamics.  
The models detailed in this report represent a redesign of this initial work to improve species 
and geographic resolution, as well as to update in time to the beginning of fully domestic fishery 
management in the 1990s. In addition, we extend mass balance modeling and analysis beyond 
the Bering Sea to all areas managed by the North Pacific Fishery Management Council 
(NPFMC), including the Aleutian Islands (AI) and western Gulf of Alaska. Data for this 
modeling has been supplied from multiple agencies and programs, including the Alaska Fisheries 
Science Center’s (AFSC) Resource Assessment and Conservation Engineering (RACE) and 
Resource Ecology and Fisheries Management (REFM) Divisions and National Marine Mammal 
Laboratory (NMML). Additional data were collected from the Alaska Department of Fish and 
Game (ADF&G) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS). Overall, these new models 
represent the most comprehensive synthesis of predator/prey relationships to date for the large 
marine ecosystems of the EBS, GOA, and AI.  
Recent publications suggest that the importance of predator prey interactions may shift in time 
as ecosystems adjust to climate fluctuations (Bailey 2000, Hunt et al. 2002). Building on 
Ecopath-type mass balance models, dynamic Ecosim-type models may be useful in 
understanding and evaluating hypotheses regarding the shifting control of marine fish production 
from bottom up to predator control. In a complex multispecies system, the most powerful 
hypothesis evaluation methods will employ dynamic projections across the ecosystem, including 
both sensitive species and trophically important but undersampled species. Because data quality 
varies by ecosystem and species group, it can be difficult to draw conclusions about species 
sensitivity and energetic influence within the ecosystem if that species is undersampled. 
Therefore, we believe it is important to introduce a more rigorous evaluation of uncertainty than 
EwE can supply. While exercises such as those presented in NRC (2003) are a step towards 
addressing real-life management problems in an ecosystem context, we believe that failure to 
include an appropriate evaluation of uncertainty makes this particular iteration of EwE an 
inappropriate tool for management applications. However, it is equally inappropriate to assume 
that there is too much uncertainty to evaluate hypotheses in the ecosystem context, especially 
because the ecosystem context itself imposes constraints which can be used to advantage. The 
thermodynamic constraints inherent in food webs and modeled within Ecopath may be used to 
2
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
bound the estimation problem for species about which too little data are available: this procedure 
may add information to dynamic projections in a formal sense.  
To this end, we introduce our Ecosense routines and results in this report. Ecosense is a 
method for incorporating Ecopath thermodynamic constraints and model structure into dynamic 
ecosystem model projections within a Bayesian Synthesis framework (e.g. Givens et al. 1993). 
An outline of this method was previously published for a simplified case in the subarctic Pacific 
gyres, in which model structure provides the only additional information to the model (Aydin et 
al. 2003). Here, we apply this method to much more species rich and data rich models which 
nevertheless have data-poor groups. 
As a whole, Ecopath and Ecosense are tools designed to examine explicit predator/prey 
relationships and their effects on changes in mortality throughout each modeled ecosystem. 
Accounting for this food web variability is an important component of ecosystem management, 
but should not be seen as a complete view: habitat, life-history, climate, and other non 
predator/prey interactions are not directly captured by the use of these models.  
1.2 Model Setting  
The food web models described in this document are based on a mass-balance approach; that 
is, the flows of biomass between functional components in the food web (species or aggregated 
species compartments) are accounted for in such a way that any imbalance (positive or negative) 
between input and output of a compartment may be considered either indication of data 
uncertainty or true energy loss/gain between the compartment and the remainder of the system. 
The ideal methodology provides relatively independent estimates of input (bottom-up supply) 
and output (top-down removal) so that the relative consistency of the multiple sources of data 
may be assessed. 
1.2.1 Time scale 
The mass balance approach provides a “snapshot” of the system state during a particular 
period of time. The base time period for the three models was taken to be 1990-1994, with data 
included from adjacent time periods as necessary. This time period was selected to represent a 
recent time period covering several surveys, but with enough years between the base model and 
the present year to tune dynamic forward projections. Cetacean and seabird estimates, not 
available as time series from this earlier period, were included as “most recent” (1997-2002) 
estimates. 
The models are considered “annual” models and growth and consumption rates are scaled to 
yearly totals. However, fish diet data is primarily derived from summer collections (May­
September)—it is assumed that wh ile annual averages are used for consumption rates, most of 
this consumption occurs during the summer. The exception to this rule is for ice-edge following 
species that overwinter in the Bering Sea, whose consumption is in wintertime only. 
1.2.2 Area description and maps 
For analysis with a mass-balance approach, each ecosystem is considered to be a homogenous 
system in which species mix freely, with the geographic boundaries of the system set large 
3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
enough so that migration across the model boundaries is minimal, and yet small enough so that 
processes throughout the ecosystem are relatively uniform.  
The three geographically separate food web models, one for each of the eastern Bering Sea, 
Gulf of Alaska, and Aleutian Islands, were based on the current definitions of these management 
regions (Fig. 1). This was selected as a primary division so as to model stocks on the same scale 
as the management of major commercial groundfish species. In general, these divisions 
correspond with the understood geographic ranges of many stocks. However, within each of 
these regions are multiple biogeographic subareas delineated by oceanography or bathymetry 
(e.g., NRC 1996). While a given stock may range across several of these subareas, the critical 
processes controlling production may vary between the subareas. Therefore, each of the three 
models was divided into subareas based on RACE survey strata, and the actual geographic area 
was limited to the continental shelf and slope (<1,000 m depth). Functional groups considered to 
be “local” are considered to consist of different populations in each modeled subregion. This 
effectively encodes predator depth and location preferences into the diet matrix; a species 
consuming copepods in one subregion alone is considered to be limited by the production in that 
subregion. 
On a larger scale, many species, especially marine mammals but also commercial fish such as 
sablefish, move between regions or spend a significant portion of the year or their life cycle 
outside of a given model region. For the purposes of mass-balance modeling, rather than 
explicitly modeling immigration and emigration rates, biomass levels were weighted by the 
amount of time each such stock spends in each modeled region. Fisheries were included as they 
occur in the modeled regions. While this accounting is sufficient for building mass-balance 
models, further specification of imported diet and external fishing (feeding and fishing of species 
outside the model’s geographic boundaries) will be required for dynamic simulations. 
1.2.2.1	 Eastern Bering Sea 
The mass balance model of the EBS continental shelf system is defined by the North Pacific 
Fishery Management Council (NPFMC) management areas between 500 and 531 (but does not 
include area 530), which coincide roughly with International Pacific Halibut Commission 
(IPHC) management areas 4C-4E (Fig. 1) in the EBS. The continental shelf and slope to 
approximately 1,000 m are included in the model following AFSC bottom trawl surveys. Unlike 
in the AI or GOA, nearshore areas of less than 50 m depth are included in the shallowest depth 
stratum for the EBS. Within the NPFMC management areas listed above, the area of the EBS 
shelf/slope covered by NMFS trawl surveys is 495,218 km
2 (Table 1). This total shelf area was 
used to calculate biomass and production per unit area as model inputs.  
There are ten spatial strata in the EBS model: six on the EBS shelf, three on the northern 
Alaska Peninsula (“Horseshoe”), and one along the EBS slope (Fig 2a). The shelf habitat types 
are defined as “shallowest” habitats from 0-50 m depth, “shallow” habitats from 50-100 m depth, 
and “middle” habitats from 100-200 m depth. The entire EBS slope habitat ranges from 200­
1,000 m depth. Habitats north of the Alaska Peninsula in the Horseshoe area are classified 
similarly to GOA and AI, with shallow, middle and deep regions referring to the 0-100 m, 100­
200 m, and 200-500 m depth layers, respectively. 
4
 
 
 
  
 
     
 
 
  
                           
 
              
 
       
 
                        
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Table 1. Basic spatial information of the Eastern Bering Sea food-web model. Numbers in parentheses refer 
to percent of total area; areas as estimated by database manager in square kilometers.  
Region NorthWest SouthEast Horseshoe Total 
Depth (m) Areas 531,524 Areas < 520 518 
Shallowest  41,330 78,704 120,033 
0-50 (8.3%) (15.9%) 4,026 (24.2%) 
Shallow 108,439 103,920 (0.8%) 216,384 
50-100 (21.9%) (21.0%) (43.7%) 
Middle 95,218 38,991 1,849 136,057 
100-200 (19.2%) (7.9%) (0.4%) (27.5%) 
Deep 21,136    1,607 22,743    
200-500+ (4.3%) (0.3%) (4.6%) 
258,063  229,673  7,482 495,218 
(52.1%) (46.4%) (1.5%) 
1.2.2.2	 Gulf of Alaska 
The mass balance model of the GOA continental shelf system is defined laterally by the North 
Pacific Fishery Management Council (NPFMC) management areas 610, 620, 630, and 640, 
which coincide roughly with International Pacific Halibut Commission (IPHC) management 
areas 3A and 3B (Fig. 1) in the GOA. The continental shelf and slope to approximately 1,000 m 
are included in the model following AFSC bottom trawl surveys; nearshore areas of less than 50 
m depth are not included. Within the NPFMC management areas listed above, the area of the 
GOA shelf/slope covered by NMFS trawl surveys is 291,840 km2 (Table 2). This total shelf area 
was used to calculate biomass and production per unit area as model inputs.  
There are nine spatial strata in the GOA model, representing three very general habitat types 
in each of three geographical sections (Fig 2b). The habitat types are defined as “shelf” habitats 
from 50-200 m depth, “gully” habitats from 100-200+ m depth, and “slope” habitats from 200­
1,000 m depth. The distinction between “gully” and “slope” habitats is defined according to the 
trawl survey strata; in general, gully habitats are deep areas within the continental shelf 
surrounded by shallower shelf areas, whereas slope habitats are found at the seaward margin of 
the continental shelf. Management area 610 (which corresponds to the INPFC “Shumagin” areas 
and the NMML EAI and WGOA areas) is designated as the “Western GOA” in this model. 
Management areas 620 and 630 (corresponding to the INPFC “Chirikof” and “Kodiak” areas and 
the NMML CGOA area) is designated as the “Central GOA” in this model, and NMFS area 640 
(INPFC “Yakutat”) is designated the “Eastern GOA” in this model. 
5
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 2. Basic spatial information of the Gulf of Alaska food-web model. Numbers in parentheses refer to 
percent of total area; areas as estimated by database manager in square kilometers. 
Region Eastern Central Western Total 
Depth (m) 640 630 and 620 610 
Shelf 46,046  112,721  49,303 208,070 
50-100 (15.8%) (38.5)% (16.9%) (71.3%) 
Gully 4,150 38,903 6,525 49,578 
100-200+ (1.4%) (13.3%) (2.2%) (17%) 
Slope 7,005 17,925 9,262 34,192 
200-1,000 (2.4%) (6.1%) (3.2%) (11.7%) 
57,201 169,549 65,090 291,840 
(19.6%) (58.1%) (22.3%) 
1.2.2.3	 Aleutian Islands 
The AI ecosystem model boundaries are defined laterally by the North Pacific Fishery 
Management Council (NPFMC) management areas 541, 542 and 543 respectively (Fig. 1). The 
model covers a total area of 56,936 km2(Table 3). East to West it extends from 170˚ W to 170˚ E 
within which three regions are recognized:  
Eastern area: from 170˚W to177˚W (roughly from Samalga to Tanaga Pass). 
Central area: from 177˚W to 177˚E (roughly from Tanaga Pass to just west of the Rat Islands), 
and 
Western area: from 177˚E to 170˚E (from W of the Rat Islands to Attu Island).  
Note that outside a management context, the model covers only those areas generally referred 
to as central (Samalga to Amchitka Pass) and western Aleutian Islands (Amchitka to Attu 
Island). The vertical range of the model goes from surface level down to 500 m deep; with 
shallow, middle and deep regions referring to the 0-100 m, 100-200 m., and 200-500 m depth 
layers, respectively. Figure 2c shows a map of the geographical extent of the model while Table 
3 summarizes area and layers basic statistics. For the halibut fisheries, area 4B as defined by the 
IPHC was used to estimate catches in the Aleutian Islands. 
6
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Table 3. Basic spatial information of the Aleutian Islands food-web model. Numbers in parentheses refer to 
percent of total area; areas as estimated by database manager in square kilometers. 
Region Eastern Central Western Total 
Depth (m) 541 542 543 
Shallow 6,848 5,847 4,880 17,575 
0-100 (12%) (10%) (9%) (31%) 
Middle 7,768 4,606 5,318 17,691 
100-200 (14%)  (8%) (9%) (31%) 
Deep 10,584 6,089 4,996 21,670 
200-500 (19%) (11%)  (9%) (38%) 
25,200 16,542 15,194 56,936 
(44%) (29%) (27%) 
7
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
649 
659 
519 
521 
523 
Figure 1. 	 Management areas included in the ecosystem models for the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Gulf of 
Alaska (GOA) and Aleutian Islands (AI). The maps show North Pacific Fishery Management 
Council (NPFMC) fishery management areas in Alaska (top) and International Pacific Halibut 
Commission (IPHC) management areas (bottom) in the North Pacific. 
8
 
 
 
Figure 2a. Eastern Bering Sea model strata 
9
 
 
 
 
Figure 2b.  Gulf of Alaska model strata 
10

 
 
 
 
Figure 2c.  Aleutian Islands model strata 
11

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
1.2.3 Species breakdown and scale types 
All individually modeled species groups are listed in Table 4. Note that these are the model 
group names, which do not always correspond to single taxonomic species. Full descriptions of 
the species included in each of these groups are found in Appendix A. Not all indicated species 
occur in all modeled regions (also described in detail in Appendix A). Species were categorized 
as one of either migratory (moving specifically across model boundaries), stock (primarily 
contained within each model’s boundaries), complexes (stocks consisting of multiple species) or 
local (subpopulation/different species may occur in different subdomains of each of the three 
models). Further, species were modeled as either biomass pools or aged (initially split into 
juvenile and adult biomass accounting; this would be elaborated into a fully age-structured 
model during future dynamic simulations). 
Juvenile groups were included to account for ontogenetic diet shifts and to represent age 
structure for protected pinnipeds and commercially important fish species. See Appendix A for 
detailed pinniped juvenile definitions. In general, we defined “juveniles” of each major 
groundfish species to be those individuals less than 20 cm long. This size threshold was based on 
observations of groundfish predator diets, where fish smaller than 20 cm were much more 
common in diets than those above 20 cm in length. Using a size threshold to define all juvenile 
groups means that the age of juveniles may vary by species. The approximate ages 
corresponding to juvenile groups for each species in these models are discussed in each species 
group description in Appendix A.  
Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) represent a unique model group, as a large proportion of 
the critical stages in their life cycle occur outside of modeled areas, and their presence occurs in 
compressed bursts of migration throughout the year. These bursts represent a large component of 
both food supply and predation, and yet their temporal compression prevents scaling their brief 
in-system growth rates to the remainder of their life cycle. Therefore, outmigrating and 
immigrating salmon are considered to be separate (unlinked) species and treated as an input 
parameter rather than a state variable for dynamic simulations. The substantial catch of incoming 
adult salmon is included in the EBS and GOA models, although this fishery operates differently 
than other modeled fisheries (terminal fishery). The AI model also includes a salmon fishery, 
although the salmon fisheries there (seine, gillnet and subsistence) are minimal (<24 metric tons 
(t) caught per year). 
12
 
 
  
 
 
 
Table 4. Model groups. 
Juvenile 
Category Group Group? Model 
Toothed Whales Transient killer whales no all 
Toothed Whales Sperm and beaked whales no all 
Toothed Whales Resident killer whales no all 
Toothed Whales Porpoises no all 
Toothed Whales Belugas no EBS only 
Baleen Whales Gray whales no all 
Baleen Whales Humpback whales no all 
Baleen Whales Fin whales no all 
Baleen Whales Sei whales no all 
Baleen Whales Right whales no all 
Baleen Whales Minke whales no all 
Baleen Whales Bowhead whales no EBS only 
Otters and Pinnipeds Sea otters no all 
Otters and Pinnipeds Walrus and bearded seals no EBS only 
Otters and Pinnipeds Northern fur seal yes all 
Otters and Pinnipeds East Steller sea lion yes GOA only 
Otters and Pinnipeds West Steller sea lion yes all 
Otters and Pinnipeds Resident seals no EBS only 
Otters and Pinnipeds Wintering seals no EBS only 
Birds Shearwater no all 
Birds Murre no all 
Birds Kittiwake no all 
Birds Auklet no all 
Birds Puffin no all 
Birds Fulmar no all 
Birds Storm Petrel no all 
Birds Cormorants no all 
Birds Gulls no all 
Birds Albatross and jaeger no all 
Sharks Sleeper sharks no all 
Sharks Salmon sharks no all 
Sharks Dogfish no all 
Aged Roundfish Walleye pollock yes all 
Aged Roundfish Pacific cod yes all 
Aged Roundfish Pacific herring yes all 
Aged Large Flatfish Arrowtooth flounder yes all 
Aged Large Flatfish Kamchatka flounder yes EBS, AI only 
Aged Large Flatfish Greenland turbot yes EBS, AI only 
Aged Large Flatfish Pacific halibut yes all 
Aged Small Flatfish Yellowfin sole EBS, AI only all 
Aged Small Flatfish Flatnead sole yes all 
Small Flatfish Northern rock sole EBS only all 
Small Flatfish Southern rock sole no GOA, AI only 
Small Flatfish Alaska plaice no all 
Small Flatfish Dover sole no all 
Small Flatfish Rex sole no all 
Small Flatfish Miscellaneous flatfish no all 
Skates Alaska skate no all 
Skates Bering skate no all 
Skates Aleutian skate no all 
Skates Whiteblotched skate no all 
Skates Mud skate no all 
Skates Longnose skate no all 
Skates Big skate no all 
Aged Deep Roundfish Sablefish yes all 
Deep Roundfish Eelpouts no all 
Deep Roundfish Giant grenadier no all 
Deep Roundfish Pacific grenadier no all 
Deep Roundfish Other Macrourids no all 
Deep Roundfish Miscellaneous deep fish no all 
Rockfish Pacific ocean perch GOA only all 
Rockfish Sharpchin rockfish no all 
Rockfish Northern rockfish no all 
13
 
 
 
Table 4. Continued.    
Juvenile 
Category Group Group? Model 
Rockfish Dusky rockfish no all 
Rockfish Shortraker rockfish no all 
Rockfish Rougheye rockfish no all 
Rockfish Shortspine thornyheads GOA only all 
Rockfish Other Sebastes no all 
Aged Shelf Roundfish Atka mackerel yes all 
Shelf Roundfish Greenlings no all 
Shelf Roundfish Large sculpins no all 
Shelf Roundfish Other sculpins no all 
Shelf Roundfish Miscellaneous shallow fish no all 
Cephalopods Octopus no all 
Cephalopods Squids no all 
Forage Fish Salmon returning no all 
Forage Fish Salmon outgoing no all 
Forage Fish Bathylagidae no all 
Forage Fish Myctophidae no all 
Forage Fish Capelin no all 
Forage Fish Sand lance no all 
Forage Fish Eulachon no all 
Forage Fish Other managed forage fish no all 
Forage Fish Other pelagic smelts no all 
Shellfish Tanner crab EBS only all 
Shellfish King crab EBS only all 
Shellfish Snow crab EBS only EBS only 
Shellfish Pandalid shrimp no all 
Shellfish Non-pandalid (NP) shrimp no all 
Motile Benthic Epifauna Sea star no all 
Motile Benthic Epifauna Brittle star no all 
Motile Benthic Epifauna Urchins sand dollars and cucumbers no all 
Motile Benthic Epifauna Snails no all 
Motile Benthic Epifauna Hermit crabs no all 
Motile Benthic Epifauna Miscellaneous crabs no all 
Motile Benthic Epifauna Miscellaneous Crustaceans no all 
Motile Benthic Epifauna Benthic Amphipods no all 
Sessile Benthic Epifauna Anemones no all 
Sessile Benthic Epifauna Corals no all 
Sessile Benthic Epifauna Benthic Hydroids no all 
Sessile Benthic Epifauna Benthic Urochordates no all 
Sessile Benthic Epifauna Sea pens no all 
Sessile Benthic Epifauna Sponges no all 
Benthic Infauna Bivalves no all 
Benthic Infauna Polychaetes no all 
Benthic Infauna Miscellaneous worms no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Scyphoziod jellies no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Fish larvae no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Chaetognaths no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Euphausiids no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Mysids no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Pelagic Amphipods no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Pelagic gelatinous filter feeders no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Pteropods no all 
Pelagic Zooplankton Copepods no all 
Microbial Loop Benthic bacteria no all 
Microbial Loop Microzooplankton no all 
Primary Producers Algae no all 
Primary Producers Large phytoplankton no all 
Primary Producers Small phytoplankton no all 
Primary Producers Outside production no all 
Detritus Discards no all 
Detritus Offal no all 
Detritus Pelagic detritus no all 
Detritus Benth detritus no all 
Detritus Outside detritus no all 
14
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1.3 New Information and Improvements Over Previous Models 
We present the first comprehensive mass balance models for the GOA and AI ecosystems, 
and the EBS model presented here is substantially different from previously published mass 
balance models for the EBS (Aydin et al. 2002, Trites et al. 1999). These three models were 
designed to fully exploit the large amount and high quality of data available for Alaskan fisheries 
and ecosystems by including biomass pools for juveniles and adults of all major groundfish, for 
dozens of forage species, birds, and marine mammals, and for many detailed taxonomic 
categories within benthos and zooplankton. This resulted in models with 124-132 biomass pools, 
three to four times the typical number modeled in previous work. The detailed Alaskan fisheries 
catch data was used to define 14-16 fisheries in each model with a full suite of target and 
incidental species catch, both retained and discarded. This gives us the capability to evaluate 
ecosystem effects of bycatch mortality on nontarget as well as target species. In previous EBS 
models, fishing was included only as direct fishing mortality on target species; addressing the 
ecosystem impacts of a particular fishing fleet was not possible. In the current models, diet 
information from a wider range of species is included, and diets are weighted by biomass of 
consumers in survey spatial strata to account for diet differences across the vast areas modeled. 
We also employed a new method standardizing diet estimation for marine mammals and seabirds 
from literature sources. Finally, production and consumption parameters for many species were 
estimated based on detailed biological information including weight at age measured on surveys, 
rather than on empirical relationships. Finally, low trophic levels and detritus groups were 
modeled in more detail than in previous models: each Alaskan model has both benthic and 
pelagic microbial pools as well as benthic and pelagic detritus pools to separate these important 
processes. In addition, both phytoplankton and zooplankton groups were separated to clarify and 
test hypotheses regarding energy flow pathways between large and small phytoplankton and 
copepods, euphausiids, mysids and other pelagic groups.  
1.4 Outline of Result Types 
We use these three models and comparisons between them to describe and explore key food 
web relationships and potential fisheries interactions in each ecosystem. In the initial descriptive 
results, we present alternate ways of visualizing each ecosystem and its key energy flow 
pathways. Then, we show examples to demonstrate the uses of the food web models to provide 
single species indicators and statistics as well as ecosystem indicators and statistics. Single 
species indicators presented explore ecosystem relationships for walleye pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma) and the pollock fisheries in each ecosystem. Three general types of ecosystem 
indicators are then presented. In the first, we demonstrate the variability in the ecosystem role of 
a key fished predator species, Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus), between the three food webs. 
In the second, we present differences in the consumption of key forage species between the three 
food webs. Finally, we present trophodynamic comparisons of biomass, predator consumption 
and fisheries catch, and the impacts of certain consumers on each ecosystem. Despite the similar 
modeling framework and construction of the models, the data from each system included in the 
analysis clearly defines differences in food web structure which may be important considerations 
for fishery management in Alaskan ecosystems.  
15
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
2. Methods 
2.1 Modeling Framework 
2.1.1 Ecopath modeling 
Ecopath is a food web analysis tool that has gained broad recognition as a methodology for 
assembling and exploring data on marine food webs (Polovina 1985, Christensen and Pauly 
1992, Christensen et al. 2000). The implementation we used to prepare these models, Ecosense, 
was written by one of the authors (Aydin) based on Ecopath and Ecosim code provided by V. 
Christensen (University of British Columbia, pers. comm., 2003). The code was reviewed and 
modified for formal parameter estimation in Microsoft Excel, Visual Basic, and C++ 
development environments. The modifications were focused on (1) automating links between 
AFSC survey and assessment databases to allow consistent updating of the regional submodels 
on a regular basis; (2) implementing formal parameter estimation procedures (see section 2.2 and 
Appendix B); (3) appropriate spatial weighting of input biomass and diet data; (4) iterative 
estimation of diet composition from general “preferences” derived from literature where direct 
data were unavailable; and (5) incorporation of uncertainty within model outputs. We describe 
spatial weighting and “preference” diet estimation in Section 2.1.2., and estimation of 
uncertainty in Section 2.4.  
Ecopath is a mass-balance model, built by solving a simple set of linear equations which 
quantify the amount of material (measured in biomass, energy or tracer elements) moving in and 
out of each compartment (functional group) in a modeled food web. A single functional group 
(food web compartment) may be a single species or a set of trophically similar species. The 
master Ecopath equation is, for each functional group (i) with predators (j): 
⎡
 ⎤
P
 Q
⎛⎜⎝
⎞⎟⎠
*
⎛⎜⎝
⎞⎟⎠
*
=
∑
B
 EE IM BAi B
 DC
 EM C
*
 +
 +
 +
 +
 i (1)⎢
⎢⎣
⎥
⎥⎦
i i i j ij i
B
 B
i j j 
The definition of the parameters in the above equation, and the general methods we used to 
derive their group specific values, are given in Table 5.  
16
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
    
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Table 5.  Parameters (input data) and parameter calculation methods for the Ecopath master equation. 
Parameter Abbreviation (units) Parameter source 
Biomass B (t/km2) Data or model estimate: Survey estimates, 
sampling programs, stock assessments; estimated 
by fixing EE if no data available 
Production/ Biomass P/B (1/year) Data: Mortality rates, growth rates, bioenergetics 
models 
Consumption/ Q/B (1/year) Data: Bioenergetics models, gut content analysis 
Biomass 
Diet composition DC (proportion by biomass/wet Data: Gut content analysis 
Fisheries Catch 
Biomass 
weight) 
C (t/km2) 
BA (t/km2) 
Data: Fisheries statistics 
Data: Biomass trend (only used if energetic 
Accumulation 
Immigration and IM and EM (t/km2) 
demand requires it) 
Data: Used to specify annual net migration 
Emigration imbalance (not used in these models) 
Ecotrophic Efficiency EE (proportion) Model estimate or assumption: Estimated by 
Ecopath; if no biomass data are available, EE is 
fixed at a standard level (0.8 here) to estimate 
biomass 
In general, parameters can be either derived from data or estimated by the model; to solve the 
set of linear equations in Ecopath, the model will estimate one parameter given the values 
supplied for the other parameters. The preferred method when using the Ecopath model is to 
input all parameter values from independent data sources, except for ecotrophic efficiency (EE), 
for each functional group. Ecotrophic efficiency measures the proportion of a group’s total 
production which is removed by mortality (consumption, fishing) on an annual basis within the 
ecosystem. Ecopath will estimate a vector EE values by solving the resulting set of linear 
equations, with EE as the unknown for each functional group, utilizing the generalized inverse 
method (Mackay 1981) to guarantee a solution. The estimation of EE is the primary tool for data 
calibration in Ecopath: independent estimates of consumption and production of different species 
often lead to initial conclusions that species are being preyed upon more than they are produced 
(EE>1.0), which is impossible under the mass-balance assumption (Christensen et al. 2000).  
By using an EE greater than 1.0 as a diagnostic tool for error, it is then possible to assess the 
relative quality of each piece of input data to adjust inputs to a self-consistent whole. This 
process is known as “balancing” the model: it does not imply that the true ecosystem is in 
equilibrium but rather quantifies the uncertainty contained in the estimates of supply and demand 
present in the system. It should be noted that this is a “one way” criterion. If specified mortality 
on a species is greater than its production, the species is flagged as containing an error (EE>1.0), 
while if production is greater than specified mortality this is considered acceptable. This reflects 
the fact that it is possible and likely, even in a closed system, to have unspecified energy loss 
from a given compartment (such as due to disease or senescence for top predators) but it should 
not be assumed that there is unspecified energy gain. 
In cases where biomass is unknown for a functional group, the EE for the group may be fixed 
(usually at a value between 0.8-1.0) and used to estimate the minimum biomass or production 
rate required to satisfy the consumption rates of the group’s predators; this is known as a “top­
17
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
down” balance. In our study, this “minimum production” method was used only in cases where 
no reasonable estimate of biomass was available for a group (Appendix A lists these groups in 
detail). A fixed value of 0.8 was selected for all such species: this value of 0.8 was chosen by 
trial and error to produce adequate detritus cycling within the models. 
The mass-balance constraints of Ecopath do not in themselves require or assume that the 
modeled ecosystem is in equilibrium, but rather require that any directional component (known 
increase or decrease of biomass) be included in the mass-balance accounting through the 
biomass accumulation (BA) term. In our food webs, this term is used only in cases where known 
historical decreases in the biomass of species are required to provide sufficient energy for 
measured consumption and fishing in the rest of the ecosystem.  
Within a modeled regime, it is assumed that the components of the ecosystem either (a) lie 
close (within the range of short-term process noise) to an attractive and relatively stable 
equilibrium for the given biomass levels and mortality rates, or (b) are subject to an explicitly 
specified directional trend as captured by inclusion of a Biomass Accumulation parameter. For 
species close to equilibrium, the system is not assumed to exist in this state in any given instant; 
rather, like a carrying capacity for an individual species, it is the state towards which the 
ecosystem would tend in the absence of driving perturbations (changes in fishing rates, climate, 
or other process-related noise). For extensions of these assumptions to non-equilibrium 
estimation see the section on dynamic modeling, below. 
2.1.2 Improvements over standard ecopath models 
Traditionally, Ecopath is set up so that there is only one set of input parameters (diet, 
removals, B, P/B, Q/B, and/or EE) for each functional group. The version used here has an 
option for intermediate subregional inputs for diet, biomass and/or EE. Depending on data 
availability for each functional group, the final diet was either as entered (if only regional data 
was available), or estimated by weighting the subregional diets according to biomass and/or area 
of the subregion(s). Likewise, biomass values were estimated either at a regional level or as the 
sum of the subregional values. The subregions used were based on RACE survey strata (Tables 
1-3) and include depth (shallow, middle, and deep) and location (eastern, central and western) 
categories for nine to ten depth/location subregions total, depending on the model. The 
subregional inputs allow a wider range of data treatments: the traditional method assumes 
homogenous consumption/ production throughout the ecosystem; the most heterogeneous case 
considers functional groups as different populations in each modeled subregion, and effectively 
encodes predator depth and location preferences into the diet matrix, limiting consumption to the 
production in the subregion where it takes place.  
Another difference with the standard Ecopath is the way the diet composition is partitioned 
among prey items for diets with poor taxonomic resolution. The standard method involves 
straightforward assignment of a fixed diet proportion to each functional group that was a prey 
item for any one given predator. This was possible when the diet composition data (regional or 
subregional) had equal or better taxonomic resolution than the functional groups in the model 
(e.g. groundfish diets). The second method, called “preference”, was used when taxonomic 
resolution was poor (as for marine mammals and seabirds) and a given prey category could be 
assigned to several functional groups, giving rise to a “prey cluster” (e.g., the category 
“cephalopods” can be assigned to functional groups “squids” and “octopus” which together 
constitute the “cephalopod” prey cluster). The initial step of the preference method was to 
18
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
identify the functional groups that comprise a prey cluster; then the cluster was assigned a fixed 
proportion of the diet composition; finally, the proportion assigned to the cluster was partitioned 
among the functional groups based on availability to groundfish. The underlying assumption is 
that the more abundant prey are also more available for consumption, hence consumption is 
proportional to abundance.  
2.2 Input Data and Parameter Estimation Methods 
Input data include group specific values for the primary (and/or alternative) parameters B, PB, 
QB, (EE), DC, Catch (+ Discards + Offal), (Unassimilated consumption), and (Detritus fate). 
The modeling framework described below is designed to make use of data collected primarily for 
the purposes of single-species management, either from fisheries, or from marine mammal, 
seabird, or lower trophic level monitoring programs. Full details of the references for each 
parameter for each species are found in Appendix A. 
Our intent was to use independent, field-based estimates of biomass for every model group; 
therefore, we prioritized using survey data over stock assessment model output to the extent 
possible. Groundfish biomass values are taken from RACE trawl surveys in 1979-2002 and, in 
the case of roundfish with low catchability to trawls, they are supplemented by stock assessment 
estimates. A full description of trawl survey methods is presented in Appendix B. Production and 
consumption rate estimates combine mortality estimates from literature and stock assessments 
with growth ranges measured from available REFM age-length or age-weight data, as described 
in Appendix B. Shellfish parameters were estimated from Alaska Department of Fish and Game 
(ADF&G) records listed in the Appendix A. Bird estimates were derived from colony counts 
provided by USFWS, with birds not nesting in the region being extrapolated from North Pacific-
wide estimations. A full description of these methods by functional group is found in Appendix 
A. 
Marine mammal estimations were performed in conjunction with researchers in the National 
Marine Mammal Laboratory (NMML) and represent their best current information on stock size 
and mortality rates for each species as provided by authors N. Friday (NMML) and D. Kinzey 
(University of Washington). Consumption and growth rates were calculated with a general 
marine mammal bioenergetics model detailed in the Appendix B; for pinnipeds these models 
were compared to more recent laboratory investigations.  
Lower trophic level biomass and production estimates were primarily derived from literature 
values (specific to region) and supplemented with plankton models and data provided by AFSC 
Fisheries Oceanography Coordinated Investigations (FOCI) researchers and the results of several 
broad research programs as detailed in the Appendix A.  
Diet data for groundfish were calculated from a detailed analysis of the REEM food habits 
database which included bootstrap estimation of diet uncertainty, as outlined in the Appendix B. 
Pinniped diets were supplied from literature with additional information contributed by E. 
Sinclair (AFSC, pers. comm., 2003), while cetacean diet estimates were obtained from a NMML 
review conducted by S. Harkness (AFSC, pers. comm., 2003). Diet for other species was 
provided from literature values obtained by the authors (Appendix A). 
19
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
In many cases, especially for birds and mammals, literature diet data was only available to 
indicate predator preference between broad categories (between “roundfish” and “cephalopods” 
for example). In these cases, predators were assumed to consume the indicated percentages of 
each of these broader categories, but with neutral preference within the functional groups (i.e. the 
total percentage consumed of a broad category was allocated among the functional groups in 
proportion to their relative biomasses). This method is detailed in the in the preference diet 
Section 2.2.1 above, and Appendix B. 
Fisheries catch and bycatch statistics were primarily derived from the NPFMC Blend database 
1991-2002, with supplemental information included from state fisheries records (including 
indigenous catches), International Pacific Halibut Commission records, and bycatch analysis 
conducted for NMFS groundfish fisheries in its Final Programmatic Supplemental 
Environmental Impact Statement (PSEIS; NMFS 2004). A full description of the fisheries data is 
given in Appendix B. 
2.3 Balancing Procedure with Data Quality Evaluation 
An ecosystem is never frozen in a true equilibrium. A considerable body of literature suggests 
that variability in marine fish production and growth is influenced by oceanographic conditions 
(Francis et al. 1998). When available, the input data for the model includes year-specific 
estimates of production and recruitment, as measured by retrospective stock assessments and 
growth studies. As such, the starting conditions of the model, for stocks with good data coverage, 
are an implicit snapshot of the oceanographic variability and compensatory responses that 
contributed to each stock’s current biomass within the food web.  
Given this background variability, thermodynamic limitations on production require that a 
mass-balance of materials between ecosystem components exists on some scale. Balancing the 
model, to ensure that EE values are less than 1.0 for each functional group, provides a powerful 
method for ensuring that data collected from species in an ecosystem, when assembled into a 
whole, satisfies fundamental thermodynamic constrains. It may be argued that this procedure 
requires model developers to force a changing ecosystem into an inappropriate static mould; 
however, the mass balance food web developed under these conditions is simply a “snapshot” in 
time. Taken at another time, the static snapshot would be different; this is why using data from 
the appropriate time period and updating models is necessary.  
We performed the model balancing by proceeding from the highest to the lowest EE values 
that exceeded one; it was not uncommon for the initial estimation to produce EEs of 100 or 
greater (particularly for those functional groups with poor biomass estimates). If EE values of 
this range were assumed to represent actual biological shifts, it would imply species being 
reduced by a factor of 100 or more in a single year, which is biologically unreasonable in most 
cases. 
The full changes made for the purposes of balance are detailed in the Results section below. 
Much of the initial balancing served to confirm whether sampling methodologies undersampled 
prey items. Other balancing issues focused on “edge” species, for example Atka mackerel exist 
in small quantities on the edge of the Bering Sea model region, so in reference to the dominant 
flows a trace diet consumption of Atka may scale into an “unbalanced” result.  
To facilitate decisions on which input data to adjust, a grading scheme was used (Table 6) to 
rank the quality of the input data for all species groups in all three models. These data quality 
20
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
    
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
rankings, or data “pedigrees” for each model parameter, are reported for each species group in 
Appendix A. For groups with EE estimates exceeding 1.0, parameters with lower data quality 
rankings were adjusted as necessary (minimized or maximized to balance constraints) before 
parameters of higher data quality were considered for adjustment. 
Table 6. Criteria for grading data quality (pedigree) for Biomass, P/B, Q/B, Catch, and Diet input 
parameters. 
Rank and corresponding data characteristics 
1.  Data is established and substantial, includes more than one independent method (from which best method 
is selected) with resolution on multiple spatial scales.  
2.  Data is direct estimate but with limited coverage/corroboration, or established regional estimate is 
available while subregional resolution is poor. 
3. Data is proxy, proxy may have known but consistent bias. 
4.  Direct estimate or proxy with high variation/limited confidence or incomplete coverage. 
Biomass and Catch PB, QB, and Diet 
5.  Estimate requires inclusion of highly uncertain 5. Estimation based on same species but in 
scaling factors or extrapolation. “historical” time period, or a general model 
specific to the area. 
6. Historical and/or single study only, not overlapping 6. For PB or QB, general life-history proxies; 
in area or time. For diets, same species in neighboring region, 
or similar species in same region. 
7.  Requires selection between multiple incomplete 7.  General literature review from wide range 
sources with wide range. of species, or outside of region. 
8.  No estimate available (estimated by Ecopath) 8.  Functional group represents multiple 
species with diverse life history traits. 
After these corrections, only a few unbalanced functional groups remained in each system 
which could not be explained by poor data quality; in these cases a decline in these species over 
time had been noted from the data and was included as a Biomass Accumulation term. 
When run as a dynamic model, Ecosim and Ecosense (described below) contain built-in 
compensatory density-dependent responses in recruitment and production. These responses may 
be fit with time series data, and Ecosense will allow for formal model selection between alternate 
density-dependent formulations. External variability, such as oceanographic change, will not be 
explicitly modeled in the initial formulation. However, hypotheses of external control 
mechanisms derived from other sources may be explicitly included for exploration or by 
examining the residuals of these responses.  
2.4 The Ecosense Routines: Estimating Uncertainty 
The “Ecosense” method is used to convey an appropriate level of uncertainty in presenting 
model results to managers; even if uncertainty is high, qualitative results can be clearly conveyed 
from a quantitative model using this method. At its basis, the method relies on this principle: 
21
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
although much information is required to build a food web model and some of that information is 
uncertain, food web models must obey certain thermodynamic principles. For example, 
production at low trophic levels ultimately limits production at high trophic levels, and energy is 
always lost within and between trophic levels by respiration and incomplete assimilation; 
therefore an extremely high biomass of top predators in a system with low primary production is 
not possible. These thermodynamic requirements constrain the parameters used to describe the 
whole model within certain bounds; therefore, this “thermodynamic bounding” provides insights 
into the realistic range of values for uncertain parameters.  
To incorporate both the information and uncertainty in the input data (initial model state and 
parameters) and the information gained by thermodynamic bounding within the food web model, 
we used a simplified Bayesian Synthesis approach (Aydin et al. 2003). Bayesian synthesis 
provides “a framework for combining evidence about both [model] inputs and outputs while 
reflecting the uncertainty about each (Givens et al. 1993).” While Givens et al. (1993) fit their 
population model to time series data, and compared resulting model outputs with informative 
prior information on the model outputs as well as the inputs, here we simply employ the 
information gained by thermodynamically enforced food web model structure in combination 
with informative prior distributions on input parameters. This method has the flexibility to 
include fitting to time series in future experiments, or to include independent information on 
model outputs should any become available. 
To apply the Bayesian synthesis procedure, we followed four steps. First, we developed prior 
distributions on the model inputs and built 20,000 alternative realizations of the EBS, GOA, and 
AI ecosystems by sampling from these prior distributions. Second, we applied thermodynamic 
bounding to the alternative ecosystems using a persistence criterion to eliminate “impossible” 
ecosystems. Third, we used the remaining set of “possible” ecosystems to establish a range of 
baseline conditions within each of the EBS GOA, and AI ecosystems, incorporating both the 
uncertainty in the input parameters and the thermodynamic bounding. Finally, we perturbed the 
same set of “possible” ecosystems to establish a range of reactions to the perturbations which 
also incorporate both the uncertainty in input parameters and thermodynamic bounding. The 
steps are detailed below. 
1. Prior distributions on model inputs  
For each of the EBS, GOA, and AI, 20,000 simulated ecosystems were created using the 
following Monte Carlo process. Within the original models, the uncertainty in each of the static 
input parameters (B, P/B, Q/B, DC, and fisheries catch) for each functional group was assessed 
by a data grading procedure which gave each parameter an index of error between +/-10% (low 
uncertainty) and +/-90% (high uncertainty). This data grading procedure was consistent between 
regional models as it was the result of consensus between the authors (as described above). The 
20,000 model dynamic ecosystems for each of the EBS and the GOA were alternative 
realizations of the original models created by drawing from distributions to select alternative 
parameters and then integrating these parameters within the EwE model equations. The 
parameters drawn were picked based on which dynamic parameters might be expected to be 
relatively independent within a single functional group. For each predator: 
22
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
a) P/B (start) was selected from a Uniform distribution in the P/B error range; 
b) Growth efficiency (GE, equal to P/B divided by Q/B) was estimated via Q/B selection from a 
Uniform distribution in the Q/B error range; 
c) Each element of the predator’s diet composition was selected from a Uniform distribution in 
the DC error range and re-normalized (giving each diet component a normal distribution); 
d) Since the above three parameters are multiplied to determine the starting M2 for the predator’s 
prey, the M2 component had a resulting log-normal distribution deemed appropriate for 
variable consumption/feeding data; 
e) M0 was chosen from a uniform distribution around its original ECOPATH value using the 
P/B error range. Since ECOPATH sets M0 from EE to “balance” the dynamic equations, at 
the mean value for all input parameters, the system is in the original ECOPATH equilibrium; 
however by selecting M0 independently the system begins away from equilibrium; 
f) The initial biomass of each functional group was chosen from a Uniform distribution with the 
B error range. Initial fishing rate F was not changed for any species in this experiment; 
g) Parameters governing the recruitment interactions for groups with separate adult and juvenile 
pools (Appendix B, Table 7) were not perturbed for this experiment. For analyses presented 
here, we used standard Ecosim “split pool”recruitment dynamics for adults and juveniles (see 
Christensen et al. 2000 for details). While we do not plan to use this simplistic form of age 
structure for future dynamic simulations, we retained it here for comparison with previous 
modeling efforts which did employ split pools. Further, including rudimentary recruitment 
dynamics allowed us to examine the trophic impacts of our perturbations including a 
minimally realistic wide range of recruitment uncertainty for these commercially important 
groups. 
h) Parameters for the Ecosim dynamic predator/prey functional response (vulnerability, passive 
respiration rate, foraging time; see Christensen et al. 2000 for details) were set to constant 
default values because independent sources of information are not available to assess 
appropriate error ranges, and we were interested in analyzing mainly the mass balance 
parameters for the purposes of this report. In these simulations, we set vulnerability = 2; 
foraging adjust rate = 0 (no foraging adjust); passive respiration rate = 0; handling time 
importance parameter = 0 (handling time unimportant). 
2. Application of thermodynamic bounding 
Each generated alternative ecosystem was tested for relative thermodynamic consistency to 
discard “impossible” states, such as excessive predator biomass without adequate supporting 
prey production. To achieve this, we assumed that an equilibrium state was likely to exist where 
all functional groups currently in the ecosystem persist with positive biomass, but without 
explicitly specifying the equilibrium as in EwE. Each generated alternative ecosystem model was 
run forward in time for 50 years using the dynamic equations of Ecosim (described in detail in 
Walters et al. 1997). The models began out of equilibrium, and 50 years was generally sufficient 
for transient effects to damp out and for models to approach within 10% of each model’s unique 
equilibrium state. For each functional group, the year-50 biomass was examined relative to the 
starting value for each of the 20,000 alternative ecosystems. Investigation of the distribution of 
all 20,000 year-50 biomass values relative to starting biomass by functional group indicated that 
most functional groups had a bi-modal distribution of year-50 biomass, with one mode centered 
near the original (Ecopath) equilibrium biomass levels and a second, larger mode at zero. In 
other words, for a given functional group, a large subset of ecosystems no longer contained that 
23
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
functional group because it had “died out” of those ecosystems over 50 years. Examination of 
multiple functional groups across the whole set of ecosystems revealed that most of these 
extinctions resulted from the dying out of complete trophic levels. In other words, the lack, in 
most models, of an equilibrium state in which all functional groups had a positive biomass was 
not due to an ecological effect such as competitive exclusion within trophic levels resulting in 
“winners” and “losers.” Rather, it was due to drawing sets of parameters that were 
thermodynamically inconsistent, in that they represented evolutionarily unrealistic over­
consumption of entire sections of the food web. 
Based on this observation, an entire generated model was rejected if, after running forward for 
50 years, at least one functional group had decreased to 1/1,000 of its original Ecopath biomass, 
or increased to 1,000 times its original Ecopath biomass. These criteria rejected over 90% of 
generated ecosystems from consideration and eliminated the lower (zero-centered) peak from all 
distributions of year-50 biomass. Rejecting such inconsistent models was seen to represent the 
addition of a thermodynamic constraint; this allowed the exploration of non-equilibrium initial 
states while guaranteeing that the model allowed the broad functional groups that existed in the 
original EBS and GOA models to persist over time. Thus, thermodynamic bounding eliminated 
over 90% of the 20,000 generated alternative ecosystems, leaving on the order of 900-1000 
“possible” ecosystems for the EBS, GOA, and AI. These were deemed sufficient numbers of 
ecosystems for experimental baseline delineation and perturbations. 
3. Baseline condition incorporating input uncertainty and thermodynamic bounding  
Each of the “possible” ecosystems was run for 50 years (with time step of one year) with no 
perturbations to give a “baseline” distribution for each functional group’s output values of 
interest. In analyses presented here, total annual consumption (Q) was estimated for each 
predator and prey in the ecosystem. We averaged the last 10 years of output for the run for each 
ecosystem to smooth out the effects of oscillating species trajectories. The distribution of these 
10 year average endpoints was then used to generate the “baseline” median and 95% confidence 
interval for each functional group in the EBS and GOA. These runs (and those below) were 
automated within Ecosense.  
4. Perturbations incorporating input uncertainty and thermodynamic bounding  
To determine the role of Pacific cod within each ecosystem we employed a perturbation 
which reduced cod survival to determine the effect on all other groups, then employed a 
perturbation which reduced all other group survival to determine the effect on cod. The 
difference between the perturbation and the baseline observed in each of the set of “possible” 
ecosystems (step 3 above) gives a distribution of perturbation results. The median of this 
distribution and the 95% confidence interval are reported.  
For the forage fish comparison example, perturbations involved systematically increasing the 
production of a single functional group by 10% (via a 10% decrease in total mortality) in each 
“possible” ecosystem. The increased production remained in place for the entire 50 year run, 
during which time all other functional groups in the ecosystem were allowed to adjust to the 
perturbation. Therefore, there were as many perturbations as there were functional groups in 
each system: 135 in the EBS and 129 in the GOA. The results reported are the differences, for 
each functional group within each “possible” ecosystem, between the non-perturbed ecosystem 
average production over years 40-50 and the perturbed ecosystem average production over years 
24
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
40-50. The difference between the perturbation and the baseline observed in each of the set of 
“possible” ecosystems (step 3 above) gives a distribution of perturbation results. The median of 
this distribution and the 95% confidence interval are reported.  
2.5 Analysis of Mass-balanced Models 
2.5.1 Visualizing and comparing ecosystem structure 
Full food webs for each ecosystem were visualized using software developed by K. Aydin. 
(These visualizations are intended to show food web structure qualitatively but they do not 
incorporate uncertainty from the Ecosense routines.) We visualized benthic and pelagic energy 
pathways by aggregating the 140+ model groups into 30 common categories, of which 8 
represent the main commercially important single species across each ecosystem; the other 22 
categories are multispecies groups. The eight single species represented in aggregated 
visualizations were pollock, Pacific cod, Atka mackerel (Pleurogrammus monopterygius), 
Pacific ocean perch (POP, Sebastes alutus), yellowfin sole (Limanda aspera), snow crab 
(Chionoecetes opilio), arrowtooth flounder (Atheresthes stomias), and Pacific halibut 
(Hippoglossus stenolepis). The remaining categories are fisheries, pinnipeds, toothed whales, 
sharks, skates, large flatfish, piscivorous seabirds, baleen whales, planktonic seabirds, pelagics, 
small flatfish, sea otters, rockfish and deep fish, crabs, shrimp, benthic invertebrates, 
zooplankton, benthic microbes, benthic detritus, pelagic detritus, pelagic microbes, benthic algae, 
and phytoplankton.  
The diet compositions were further aggregated to compare the relative importance of the main 
pathways across the Alaskan ecosystems. Prey items in the diet matrix were assigned to one of 
the following four categories: fish (includes all fish, marine mammals, seabirds and 
cephalopods), crabs and invertebrates (includes decapods and benthic invertebrates), plankton 
(includes jellyfish, zooplankton, phytoplankton and algae) and detritus (includes benthic 
bacteria, discards, offal, pelagic and benthic detritus, and outside detritus). These main categories 
were used to characterize the feeding habits of a species, the total consumption in the ecosystem 
and to classify the species themselves according to their diet. To classify feeding habits, for each 
species the diet was collapsed into each of the four categories mentioned above. The proportion 
of each category was multiplied by the total biomass of said species. Therefore, the biomass of 
one species is summarized as percent piscivorous, percent crabivorous, percent planktivorous, 
and percent detritivorous. To examine consumption, the diet for each species was collapsed into 
each of the four categories mentioned above, and the proportion of each category was multiplied 
by that species total consumption (biomass times Q/B). The total consumption of the species is 
thus summarized as percent fish, percent crab and other invertebrates, percent plankton, percent 
detritus. Species were classified into piscivorous, crabivorous, planktivorous or detritivorous 
according to the dominant (highest) prey category. 
2.5.2 Ecosystem indicators and statistics 
1. Ecosystem models for single species indicators and statistics, with cross system comparisons 
We first present the relationships visually within the food web by highlighting a fishery or 
species group and each of its direct predators and prey, as well as the strength of the interaction. 
25
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We use the results of the static food web model to evaluate the trophic level (TL) and role of the 
species to place it within the continuum of apex predator to low trophic level prey. Then, we use 
the food web model to partition sources of mortality for a single species group. In this way, we 
evaluate fishing mortality relative to predation mortality and the remaining mortality not 
explained by the food web model to determine the extent of potential control of mortality by 
fishery managers. Sources of mortality are evaluated in terms of both proportion of total 
mortality for each group and in estimated annual tonnages consumed by other predators. We also 
evaluate the diet compositions of each group proportionally and in estimated tonnages of species 
consumed by that group. Uncertainty in these annual estimates of consumption was incorporated 
using the Sense routines described above. We use pollock as an example to demonstrate uses of 
ecosystem models to generate single species indicators and statistics, and compare these results 
across the AI, EBS, and GOA ecosystems. Detailed species group comparisons by ecosystem are 
also included along with the species group descriptions and data sources in Appendix A. 
2. Ecosystem level indicators and comparative statistics 
We also evaluate how sensitive each ecosystem is to changes in key species or species groups 
using the food web models, and how the AI, EBS, and GOA compare in terms of biomass and 
consumption characteristics. Pacific cod are used to illustrate the different ecosystem roles a 
single species can play, with different ecosystem implications arising from the same 
manipulation (an increase in mortality). Then, the three ecosystems are compared with respect to 
consumption of forage species, which illustrates important energy pathways present in each 
system. Finally, we look at a wide range of groups to compare general characteristics of biomass 
and consumption by trophic level across the three ecosystems. Trophic level (TL) for a given 
group is calculated as 1.0 plus the average of a group’s preys’ trophic levels, where primary 
producers and detritus groups have a TL = 1.0 (Aydin et al. 2002).  
26
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
3. Results and Discussion 
3.1 Quantitative Results, Model Balance, and Food Webs 
Quantitative results of all three models are summarized in Appendix tables for easy 
comparisons. Results for the Biomass, EE, P/B, QB , and TL estimates are shown in Tables C1­
C2 in Appendix C. Retained and discarded catch of each model group is shown in Table C3. Diet 
results are shown in Tables C4-C26 of Appendix C. Data quality ratings (“pedigrees”) for each 
model parameter are shown in Tables C27-C29 of Appendix C. A detailed narration of parameter 
sources and data pedigrees, as well as brief overviews of comparative results for each species 
group is found in Appendix A.  
3.1.1 Reconciling data sources to achieve balanced models 
Our approach to balancing these food web models was to alter input data as little as possible. 
While many groups required no changes to input data, there were several balancing issues 
common to all three models. The biggest issue was one of inadequate survey biomass data, 
which was addressed by substituting either stock assessment biomass estimates, or a top-down 
balance for survey biomass estimates for unassessed species where it was clear that groundfish 
surveys would not adequately sample non-groundfish species. In general, top-down balance was 
applied to benthic invertebrates and pelagic forage species across the board. There were 
groundfish species which also appeared to have survey biomass estimates inadequate to supply 
consumption demand, and these were several rockfish species and pollock in all systems. The 
steps taken to address these inconsistencies are detailed below. Additionally, about 5-10 of the 
juvenile compartments used to model age-structured species were balanced in this manner as 
well. To prevent this top-down method from merely creating sufficient supply in the model to 
satisfy any indicated demand within the food web, microzooplankton and phytoplankton in the 
EBS and GOA, respectively, were modeled with direct production estimates. Lack of 
information prevented this for the AI model. 
The top-down balance necessitated by current data limitations may create a bias in the models 
for forage fish and juvenile production estimates, specifically with respect to species such as 
sand lance, capelin, and myctophidae, and some crab and flatfish juveniles. While the constraints 
placed on the lowest trophic levels ultimately limit overall biomass estimates at mid-trophic 
levels, even those achieved by top down balance, we note that the resulting modeled biomass of 
each of these forage and juvenile groups represents the minimum amount required to sustainably 
satisfy the predators’ demand for these species. This result does not in itself guarantee that such 
biomass levels exist in the system.  
3.1.1.1	 Model-specific balancing details: EBS  
The EBS model has the highest quantity and quality of information of the three models due to 
extensive long term scientific study of this ecosystem. Fishery catch data in this ecosystem are of 
the highest quality because most large scale fisheries have 100% observer coverage in the EBS. 
Production and consumption parameter estimates were generally available from direct 
measurements or peer-reviewed literature for all groups. Diet information collected aboard 
NMFS surveys and from fishery observers is most extensive in the EBS. Two classes of groups 
27
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
were apparent in this and the other two systems; those with adequate biomass data from surveys 
or assessments, and those with inadequate biomass data. Of the 140 groups in the EBS model, 88 
had adequate data to specify all parameters, resulting in “balanced” biomass pools. Of these 88, 
three groups (adult walleye pollock, adult Pacific cod, and adult Pacific herring) had inadequate 
raw survey biomass, but adequate stock assessment-estimated biomass to supply ecosystem 
consumption needs. We felt using the assessment biomass rather than the survey biomass was 
justified for these species in particular. For pollock and herring, the assessment incorporates 
hydroacoustic or aerial estimates and therefore is a better reflection of the substantial portion of 
fish that are distributed off the bottom. For cod, the difference between the survey biomass and 
the assessment due to catchability of the bottom trawl has long been noted and is a subject of 
ongoing investigation (e.g., Thompson et al. 2006). Of the remaining groups, 48 had inadequate 
survey or other independent information to determine biomass. These groups are either not 
sampled or are generally thought to be poorly sampled by NMFS trawl surveys, and include 
juvenile fish, cephalopods, forage fish, and benthic invertebrates. These groups with inadequate 
biomass data were “top-down balanced”; in other words, we estimated the minimum biomass 
necessary to supply the consumption requirements of all groups in the ecosystem by assuming 
that 80% of the production of each group is consumed. In all of these cases, the information 
derived from groundfish and marine mammal diets constituted the “best available data” on 
biomass for these poorly sampled model groups. 
In general, NMFS trawl surveys were not expected to provide realistic biomass estimates for 
juvenile groundfish, cephalopods, forage fish, or benthic invertebrates. These surveys were not 
designed to sample small animals in any habitat or pelagic species; they were designed to sample 
the larger demersal groundfish managed by NMFS. However, there were a few cases where 
survey biomass estimates for minor managed groundfish groups were far too low to support 
ecosystem consumption demand and top down balance was required. In the EBS, these groups 
included sharpchin and northern rockfish, and the multispecies complex Other Sebastes. 
Rockfish occur in extremely small portions of the overall habitat of the EBS shelf and slope, and 
these habitats tend to be “untrawlable” by the NMFS survey gear, so trawl survey biomass 
estimates for these groups are generally thought to be underestimates of rockfish biomass.  
The remaining four groups which had problematic data included dusky rockfish, juvenile Atka 
mackerel, adult Atka mackerel, and the multispecies group Miscellaneous flatfish. Miscellaneous 
flatfish include both groups that are well surveyed and other flatfish species that are not well 
sampled by the NMFS bottom trawl survey because they are distributed nearshore. Therefore, 
this entire group was top-down balanced, primarily because cod predation caused ecosystem 
demand to exceed supply based only on trawl survey biomass. Dusky rockfish have similar 
survey biomass problems as other rockfish in the EBS ecosystem, but top-down balance was 
considered undesirable for this species which has more fishing mortality than natural mortality 
due to a relatively small amount of fishery bycatch. No stock assessment estimate of EBS dusky 
rockfish biomass is available, but this species is assessed in the GOA. Therefore, the EBS survey 
biomass estimate for dusky rockfish was scaled up by the ratio of stock assessment estimated 
biomass to survey biomass for GOA dusky rockfish (1.6), based on the assumption that an 
assessment in the EBS might compensate for bottom trawl survey biases similarly. Adult Atka 
mackerel biomass in the EBS was also based on the stock assessment for another area, in this 
case the entire BSAI management area. The Atka mackerel assessment biomass for the BSAI 
was scaled down to reflect the percent of Atka mackerel occupying EBS model strata using the 
survey biomass in each stratum. Since there is little information on the biomass of juvenile Atka 
28
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
mackerel in either system, we assumed that juvenile biomass would be 10% of adult biomass in 
the EBS. This assumption could be addressed in the future if further information on Atka 
mackerel in the EBS becomes available. 
3.1.1.2	 Model-specific balancing details: GOA  
Of the 132 biomass pools in the GOA model, unmodified input data resulted in “balanced” 
biomass pools (where consumption and fishery removals did not exceed production) for 80 of 
them, over 60% of model biomass pools. Of the 52 groups which did not immediately balance, 
47 had inadequate survey information to determine biomass. These groups shared the 
characteristics with those in the EBS model in that they are either not sampled or are generally 
thought to be poorly sampled by NMFS trawl surveys. They are the same groups in both models: 
juvenile fish, cephalopods, forage fish, and benthic invertebrates, and they had the same 
assumptions for top down balance applied as in the EBS. However, as in the EBS model, there 
were a few cases in the GOA where survey biomass estimates for minor managed groundfish 
groups were far too low to support ecosystem consumption demand and top down balance was 
required. These groups included the single species group sharpchin rockfish, and the 
multispecies complexes Other Sebastes and Small sculpins. All of these fish either live in habitat 
which may not be sampled by a bottom trawl survey (e.g., rocky) or are too small to be retained 
by survey net mesh (small sculpins), or both.  
The remaining five groups which did not immediately balance included spiny dogfish, adult 
walleye pollock, adult Pacific herring, the aggregate group Greenlings, and the detritus group 
Fishery Offal. In each of these cases the weight of evidence regarding reliability of each source 
of data was considered so that the least reliable data could be identified. In two of these cases 
(dogfish and offal), diet information of major predators of the group was considered unreliable 
and so was modified to achieve balance for the group. In three of these cases (pollock, herring, 
and greenlings), no clear source of poor data could be identified, so the model was balanced by 
incorporating observed negative biomass trends for these three groups. Information on biomass 
trends was derived either from stock assessments (pollock and herring) or from surveys 
(greenlings). Inclusion of biomass trends for pollock, herring, and greenlings are described in 
detail in each of their sections in Appendix A. The two groups requiring diet information 
modification for balance are discussed below.  
NMFS trawl survey biomass estimates for spiny dogfish are considered fairly reliable. The 
majority of spiny dogfish mortality came from salmon shark predation when data were 
unmodified. Because salmon shark diet information came from a sample of only 11 animals 
caught within Prince William Sound, this diet information was considered less reliable than 
dogfish survey biomass data when applied Gulfwide. Therefore, the percent of spiny dogfish in 
the salmon shark diet was reduced from the original 7% to 1% to reflect the lower Gulfwide 
density of dogfish relative to high density areas such as Prince William Sound, and the 
percentage of squid in the salmon shark diet was increased from 1% to 7% which also reflects 
increased density of squid in the open Gulf relative to within the Sound. Ideally, salmon shark 
diet studies should be conducted outside Prince William Sound to determine whether this change 
was appropriate.  
The maximum amount of fishery offal entering the ecosystem can be estimated using catch data 
and product recovery rates, so a consumption-based estimate for this biomass pool would be 
completely inappropriate. The major consumers of fishery offal in the GOA during the early 
29
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
1990s, according to food habits data, were Pacific cod and sablefish. Sablefish diet information 
from the early 1990s was very sparse in several model strata where fishery offal consumption 
was also estimated to be very high, which resulted in offal comprising an apparent 25% of 
sablefish diet overall. Cod had better sample sizes for food habits in all GOA strata during the 
early 1990s, but in two of these strata the percentage offal was estimated to be anomalously high 
compared with other strata, comprising as much as 9-13% of cod diets in the central gully and 
central slope areas. For sablefish, more widely distributed field observations from the 2001 GOA 
trawl survey were consulted to determine a more realistic diet proportion of fishery offal, as well 
as a better estimate of gelatinous prey which can be difficult to evaluate in preserved food habits 
samples (T. Buckley, AFSC pers. comm., 2003). Based on this additional information, sablefish 
diets were adjusted so that fishery offal comprised 5% of diet, with higher diet percentages 
allocated to deeper water prey such as squids, jellyfish, and gelatinous filter feeders. For cod, we 
hypothesized that these high-offal diet samples collected in the central gully and slope strata 
might have coincided with areas with non-representative high concentrations of offal from 
offshore dumping of plant processing waste around Kodiak. Therefore, the percentage of offal in 
cod diets for these strata was lowered to reflect percentages observed in other model strata, 
resulting in a Gulfwide cod diet proportion of 3% fishery offal. While it is true that processing 
waste from Kodiak plants was dumped offshore during the early 1990s, we have no way to 
verify whether food habits sampling may have accidentally preferentially sampled cod foraging 
in these areas. However, these adjustments preserve the original trend in the unmodified food 
habits data which suggest that sablefish and cod are the primary consumers of fishery offal in the 
GOA. In the balanced model, offal is consumed about equally at 33% each by sablefish and cod, 
with lower consumption by halibut, pollock, Tanner crab, and arrowtooth flounder. 
3.1.1.3	 Model-specific balancing details: AI 
The Aleutian Islands is perhaps the most data poor of the three ecosystems modeled, and 
required more adjustments to existing data than the EBS or GOA. Despite this, almost no diets 
were modified for balancing the AI model, but some biomass estimates were adjusted to balance 
groups where the main sources of mortality were reliable estimates of predation or directed 
fishing. The main source for biomass estimates were the bottom trawl survey data for 1991-1994 
in the Aleutian Islands, followed by available databases and published data. For several of the 
functional groups which are distributed in far deeper waters, the 500 m depth limit of the trawl 
surveys only captures the upper portion of their habitat. For example, giant grenadier biomass 
was increased by an order of magnitude from the 1991-94 survey data based on the estimate 
from 1996 when deeper waters were included in the survey. Likewise, sablefish biomass in the 
eastern Aleutians was increased according to the biomass proportions in the catches, since 
sablefish are not caught in the eastern Aleutians during the surveys. Similar to both the EBS and 
GOA models, survey biomass of walleye pollock was inadequate to supply demand from 
predators and fisheries. As with sablefish, the AI bottom trawl survey estimates do not include 
the area where the pollock fishery takes place; therefore biomass estimates from the stock 
assessment for AI pollock were used. Finally, both salmon shark and dogfish biomasses were 
increased from their survey levels. Salmon sharks are rarely caught during survey trawls, thus 
their estimated bycatch far exceeds survey estimates. An independent regional population 
estimate for the North Pacific (Nagasawa 1998) was proportioned to the Aleutians to provide a 
more accurate estimate. The dogfish estimate was derived from a combined “shark” survey 
biomass estimate which was thought to include 3.6% dogfish and 96.4% sleeper sharks. There 
30
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
was no independent estimate of biomass for dogfish in the AI, so the original dogfish biomass 
based on the combined shark survey biomass was doubled, resulting in a minimal absolute 
biomass change but one sufficient to supply the relatively small predation and fishery demand in 
the AI.  
In several cases where fishery bycatch initially resulted in excessive demand on certain 
groups, bycatch data was implicated as most uncertain because these bycatch estimates were 
extrapolated from more recent years than the model baseline. Such was the case for skates, 
where survey biomass had doubled from 1991-1994 to 1997-2000 (the years of the bycatch 
estimates). Bycatch estimates for mud, whiteblotched, Aleutian and Alaska skates were therefore 
cut by half to reflect a potentially lower population during the early 1990s. Corals were also 
initially out of balance due to bycatch. There is no biomass estimate for corals in the Aleutian 
Islands, so an estimate from the Gulf of Alaska had been used as a surrogate. Given the 
distribution of corals between the two ecosystems, this estimate turned out to be too low, and so 
it was increased by a factor of 8, the same factor by which coral bycatch in the Aleutians exceeds 
that in the Gulf of Alaska. Finally, top down balance was used for a similar set of groups in the 
Aleutians as in the EBS and GOA: poorly sampled benthic and pelagic fish groups, including 
Other macrouids, Miscellaneous deep fish, Miscellaneous shallow fish, Other Sebastes, rex sole, 
Miscellaneous flatfish, sharpchin rockfish, Other sculpins, octopus and squids.  
Scyphozoid jellyfish were the only group where an initial imbalance was corrected by 
changing diets. Jellyfish make up a large proportion of the prowfish diet, and prowfish are the 
only source of information for the feeding habits of the entire miscellaneous shallow fish group. 
Because the diet of prowfish likely contains a higher proportion of jellyfish than all other 
members of this group, jellyfish were reduced in the overall diet. Furthermore, it was noted that 
the distinction between gelatinous plankton and jellyfish was not obvious when analyzing 
stomach contents. Hence, all instances where jellyfish were present in a diet, the percentage was 
reproportioned 50-50 between jellyfish and Pelagic gelatinous filter feeders. The combined effect 
of these changes brought the jellyfish back into balance. 
3.1.2 Visualizing the food webs and primary energy flows 
The EBS food web (Fig. 3a) quantifies biomass flow over 3,230 pathways between each of its 
148 groups (including fisheries). In each of these plots, box size is proportional to biomass 
density and line width is proportional to energy flow between boxes. Groups are arranged in 
roughly the same locations for each ecosystem to facilitate comparisons. Trophic levels 
calculated within the food web model for each group, including fisheries, indicate that the halibut 
longline fishery is the highest “predator” in the EBS with a trophic level (TL) of 5.5. The 
indigenous mammal harvest and several other longline fisheries, including the rockfish longline, 
turbot longline, and sablefish longline, also occupy apex predator positions in the EBS food web 
with TLs over 5.4. The GOA food web (Fig. 3b) quantifies biomass flow over 2,969 pathways 
between its 138 total groups. Trophic levels calculated within the food web model indicate that 
the halibut longline fishery is the highest “predator” in the GOA with a trophic level (TL) of 5.4, 
with no other fisheries or predators approaching this trophic level. The AI food web (Fig. 3c) 
quantifies biomass flow over 2,676 pathways between its 140 total groups. As in the other two 
ecosystems, the halibut longline fishery is the apex predator in the AI with a TL of 5.4; the AI 
turbot trawl fishery has a similar TL. All food webs were visualized using the same plotting 
parameters, so the higher number of larger boxes in the AI web relative to the EBS and GOA 
31
 
 
 
 
webs indicates that there is less contrast in biomass density between the larger and intermediate 
groups. In the EBS, there is the greatest contrast between groups in biomass density, with fewer 
dense groups and many rarer groups. The GOA is intermediate, with a range of densities from 
large to small.  
32
 
 
  
Figure 3a.  Eastern Bering Sea food web. 
33 
 
  
Figure 3b.  Gulf of Alaska food web. 
34 
 
   
Figure 3c.  Aleutian Islands food web. 
35 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Aggregating food webs by combining groups makes differences between the modeled 
ecosystems clearer. For this comparison, we aggregated the large models shown above into 22 
functional groups plus the eight biomass dominant single groundfish species across the three 
ecosystems. The color blending in these figures shows the extent to which pelagic (blue) or 
benthic (red) energy flows into different biomass pools (Fig. 4 a, b, and c). Comparing these 
aggregated food webs, it is apparent that the EBS (Fig. 4a) has a much larger benthic influence in 
its food web than either the GOA (Fig. 4b) or the AI (Fig. 4c). The groundfish groups “small 
flats” and yellowfin sole, along with crabs and pollock, are dominant in the EBS. Conversely, the 
AI has the strongest pelagic influence in its food web relative to the two other systems. Notice in 
particular the aggregated “Rock/deep fish” group, which contains rockfish and grenadiers; in the 
EBS this group is mostly red, feeding in the benthic pathway, while in the AI this group is 
mostly blue, feeding in the pelagic pathway. Dominant groundfish in the AI occupy the pelagic 
pathway: Atka mackerel, and Pacific ocean perch (POP). The GOA appears balanced between 
benthic and pelagic pathways, but is notable in having a relatively smaller “biomass” of fisheries 
(catch) relative to the two other systems, and a high biomass of fish predators above TL 4, 
arrowtooth flounder and halibut.  
Figure 4a.  Eastern Bering Sea aggregated food web benthic (red) and pelagic (blue) pathways. 
36
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4b.  Gulf of Alaska aggregated food web benthic (red) and pelagic (blue) pathways. 
Figure 4c.  Aleutian Islands aggregated food web benthic (red) and pelagic (blue) pathways. 
37
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
By aggregating the groups further, the difference between systems is even more apparent. 
Consumption of major groups by prey category is shown in Figure 5. In the EBS, the 
consumption of detritus represents the largest portion of consumption, due to the strong benthic 
energy flow pathway in this system. In the GOA, consumption of plankton and detritus are 
nearly balanced, while in the AI, consumption of plankton is dominant due to the strong pelagic 
energy flow pathway. Although there are large biomasses of both piscivorous and invertivorous 
animals in each ecosystem, overall consumption of fish and large invertebrates amounts to less 
than 5% of the total in each ecosystem. Consumption of crabs and invertebrates differs by system 
as well, with the GOA highest at 3%, the EBS next at 2%, and the AI lowest at 1%. Piscivory is 
a small proportion of total ecosystem consumption in all three ecosystems, but is the highest 
proportion of the total in the AI (0.7%), followed by the GOA (0.5%), and then the EBS (0.2%).  
EBS GOA	 AI 
plankton 
detritus 
crabs&inverts 
fish 
Figure 5. 	 Proportion of total ecosystem consumption by prey classes in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Gulf 
of Alaska (GOA) and Aleutian Islands (AI).  
3.2 Single Species Indicators and Statistics 
The food web models of each system allow comparisons of single species interactions across 
ecosystems. Here, we use walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) to provide a detailed 
example of single species results, because it is a commercially important prey species in all three 
ecosystems. Using the web-accessible food web models, similar comparisons could be made for 
any group in the models. Brief examples of these comparisons by group are given in Appendix A 
following the species group descriptions.  
In partitioning the mortality sources for each case study species between fishing and predation 
mortality, the food web model suggests a relationship between the relative importance of fishing 
mortality and trophic level (TL). High TL predators such as halibut experience the majority of 
their mortality from fishing (Fig. 6, left panel). In contrast, the lower TL pollock experience 
much larger predation mortality than halibut. In the EBS and GOA, predation mortality exceeds 
fishing mortality for pollock, even though pollock are a commercially exploited species (Fig. 6, 
right panel). Pollock experience so much predation mortality in the GOA that an “accumulation” 
term representing a declining biomass pool for the group must be included to account for the 
estimated consumption by pollock’s many predators.  
38
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. 	 Comparison of mortality sources by ecosystem: a high trophic level predator, Pacific halibut (left) 
and a mid-trophic level species, walleye pollock (right). 
When viewed within the food webs, the pollock trawl fishery (in red) is a relatively high TL 
predator which interacts mostly with adult pollock, but also with many other species (in green; 
Fig. 7a-c.). The diverse pollock fishery bycatch ranges from high TL predators such as salmon 
sharks, sleeper sharks, and arrowtooth flounder, to mid-TL pelagic forage fish and squid, to low 
TL benthic invertebrates such as crabs and shrimp in all three ecosystems, but all of these 
catches represent extremely small flows. Because the pollock trawl fishery contributes 
significant fishery offal and discards back into each ecosystem, these flows to fishery detritus 
groups are represented as the only “predator consumption” flows from the fishery; the biomass 
of retained catch represents a permanent removal from the system.  
39
 
 
 
Figure 7a. Pollock trawl fishery in the Eastern Bering Sea food web. 
40 
 
 
  
Figure 7b.  Pollock trawl fishery in the Gulf of Alaska food web. 
41 
 
 
Figure 7c. Pollock trawl fishery in  the Aleutian Islands food web. 
42 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
In this set of models, we included detailed information on bycatch for each fishery. This data 
shows that the pollock trawl fishery is extremely species-specific in all three ecosystems, with 
pollock representing over 90% of its total catch by weight (Fig. 8 a-c). Other species caught in 
the GOA pollock trawl fishery include arrowtooth flounder and Pacific cod which account for 
2% of total catch each. The remaining GOA pollock fishery bycatch consists of various flatfish 
and roundfish. In the EBS and AI, the pollock fishery catches an even higher proportion of 
pollock, with no single bycatch species accounting for more than 1% of the catch. Although 
these catches are small in terms of percentage, the high volume pollock fisheries still account for 
the majority of bycatch of pelagic species in the BSAI and GOA management areas, including 
smelts, salmon sharks, and squids (Gaichas et al. 1999, Gaichas et al. 2006).  
Figure 8a.  Catch composition of pollock trawl fishery, Eastern Bering Sea. 
Figure 8b. Catch composition of pollock trawl fishery, Gulf of Alaska.  
43
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Figure 8c.  Catch composition of pollock trawl fishery, Aleutian Islands, 
The intended prey of the pollock trawl fishery is also a very important prey species in the 
wider EBS, GOA, and AI food webs. When both adult and juvenile pollock food web 
relationships are included, over two-thirds of all species groups turn out to be directly linked to 
pollock either as predators or prey in the food web model (Fig. 9a-c). In the GOA, the significant 
predators of pollock (blue boxes joined by blue lines) include arrowtooth flounder, halibut, cod, 
sablefish, Steller sea lions, humpback whales, and the pollock trawl fishery. Arrowtooth 
flounder, adult pollock, seabirds such as murres and puffins, and cod are significant predators of 
juvenile pollock. Significant prey of pollock (green boxes joined by green lines) are euphausiids, 
copepods, benthic shrimps, and amphipods, with juveniles preying on the euphausiids and 
copepods. 
44
 
 
 
 
Figure 9a.  Adult and juvenile pollock predators and prey in the Eastern Bering Sea food web. 
45 
 
 
  
Figure 9b.  Adult and juvenile pollock predators and prey in the Gulf of Alaska food web. 
46 
 
Figure 9c.  Adult and juvenile pollock predators and prey in the Aleutian Islands food web. 
47 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
As indicated above in Figure 6, food web modeling suggests that the majority of adult pollock 
mortality during the early 1990s was caused by predation in the EBS and GOA, but not in the AI. 
In each ecosystem, food web modeling reveals that a different set of predators cause the majority 
of predation mortality on pollock. In the EBS, most adult and juvenile pollock mortality is 
caused by pollock themselves (40%; Fig. 10a, left panels). The second largest source of adult 
pollock mortality in the EBS is the pollock fishery (19%), followed by the predators Pacific cod, 
Alaska skates, wintering seals, and arrowtooth flounder, which together account for 20% of 
pollock mortality. After adult pollock cannibalism (40%), juvenile pollock mortality is caused by 
flatfish, marine mammal and bird predation. Using the Sense routines described in Section 2.4, 
we can estimate ranges of total consumption of adult and juvenile pollock in the EBS ecosystem 
based on the food web model parameters and their associated uncertainty. Adult pollock were 
estimated to consume 2 to 3 million t of adult pollock and another 750,000 to 2 million t of 
juvenile pollock annually due to cannibalism, by far the largest consumption of pollock in the 
EBS (Fig. 10a, right panels).  
Figure 10a. Mortality sources (left) and estimated consumption by predators (right) of Eastern Bering Sea 
adult (top) and juvenile (bottom) pollock.  
In the GOA, the vast majority of early 1990s adult pollock predation mortality was caused by 
three groundfish predators: arrowtooth flounder (32% of total mortality), halibut (22%), and cod 
(15%; Fig. 10b, upper left panel) according to the food web model. The pollock trawl fishery 
48
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
causes 8.7% of adult pollock mortality, which is slightly larger in magnitude to that caused by 
sablefish, Steller sea lions (adults and juveniles combined), and by adult pollock cannibalism. 
Consumption of pollock by arrowtooth flounder alone as estimated by the food web model 
ranges from 280 thousand to 400 thousand t annually, plus another 100-400 thousand t of 
juvenile pollock (Fig. 10b, right panels). The majority (47%) of mortality on juvenile pollock is 
also caused by arrowtooth flounder, followed by adult pollock cannibalism (11%; Figure 10b, 
lower left panel). Seabirds are estimated to cause substantial juvenile pollock mortality (9% by 
murres, puffins, and kittiwakes combined), as are whales and groundfish. Halibut consume the 
second highest annual tonnage of pollock.  
Figure 10b. 	Mortality sources (left) and estimated consumption by predators (right) of Gulf of Alaska adult 
(top) and juvenile (bottom) pollock.  
In the AI, food web modeling suggests that most adult pollock mortality was caused by the 
pollock trawl fishery during the early 1990s (48%; Fig. 10c). (Fishery catch of pollock in the AI 
has subsequently declined to less than half the early 1990s catch by the late 1990s, and the 
directed fishery was closed in 1999 (Ianelli et al. 2005). Therefore, AI pollock likely now 
experience predation mortality exceeding fishing mortality as in the other two ecosystems.) The 
major predators of AI adult pollock are Pacific cod, Steller sea lions, pollock themselves, halibut, 
and skates. In the AI food web model, juvenile pollock have a very different set of predators 
from adult pollock; Atka mackerel cause most juvenile pollock mortality (71%). Estimates of 
adult pollock consumption from the Sense routines range from 8 to 27 thousand t consumed by 
49
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
cod annually, while Atka mackerel are estimated to consume between 75 and 410 thousand t of 
juvenile pollock annually in the AI ecosystem (Fig. 10c, left panels).  
Figure 10c. Mortality sources (left) and estimated consum ption by predators (right) of Aleutian Islands adult 
(top) and juvenile (bottom) pollock.  
While pollock mortality sources are different between the EBS, GOA, and AI, general pollock 
diets are similar between systems. However, the proportions of species in pollock diets differs 
between the EBS, GOA, and AI, and a key difference in pollock diets between ecosystems was 
already demonstrated from the mortality results: the amount of pollock cannibalism. These 
differences in pollock diet compositions are independent of food web model assumptions 
because they arise directly from the extensive database of food habits information collected in 
the EBS, GOA, and AI on NMFS trawl surveys.  
In the EBS, pollock diet data from the early 1990s shows that both adult and juvenile pollock 
consumed primarily copepods and euphausiids. Adult EBS pollock consumed equal proportions 
of these large zooplankton (36% and 35%), while juvenile EBS pollock consumed more 
copepods (42%) than euphausiids (32%; Fig. 11a, left panels). The next most important prey 
item for adult EBS pollock is EBS pollock; cannibalism on both adults and juveniles accounts 
for 12.9% of adult EBS pollock diet. Shrimp, amphipods, and other zooplankton round out the 
adult EBS pollock diet. Juvenile EBS pollock prey mainly on zooplankton, with smaller amounts 
of benthic amphipods and miscellaneous crustaceans accounting for less than 8% of their diet. 
50
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
Combining these diet compositions with consumption to biomass ratios and biomass estimates 
for EBS pollock within the food web model Sense routines, we estimate that adult EBS pollock 
consume between 3 million and 18 million t each of euphausiids and copepods annually, with 
juvenile EBS pollock consuming another half million to 6 million t of each group annually (Fig. 
11a, right panels). Clearly, EBS pollock account for an enormous energy transfer from pelagic 
zooplankton to higher TL predators (including humans) within the EBS ecosystem.  
Figure 11a. Diet composition (left) and estimated consumption of prey (right) by Eastern Bering Sea adult 
(top) and juvenile (bottom) pollock.  
In the GOA, pollock feed on similar prey as in the EBS, but in different proportions. Early 
1990s GOA diet data indicate that both adult and juvenile pollock feed primarily on pelagic 
zooplankton, with euphausiids comprising 50% of the adult pollock diet and 45% of the juvenile 
pollock diet (Fig. 11b, left panels). While adult and juvenile pollock diets are similar, adult 
pollock prey more on pandalid and non-pandalid (NP) shrimp (18% of diet), and juvenile pollock 
prey more on copepods (26% of diet). As in the EBS but on a smaller scale, the combination of 
this diet composition along with the high biomass of pollock within the system and the relatively 
high production rate of pollock results in high estimated flows from pelagic zooplankton and 
benthic shrimp to pollock from the Sense routine. Based on this information, adult and juvenile 
pollock combined consume an estimated 1.6 to 6.7 million t of euphausiids annually, as well as 
over 1 million t each of shrimp and copepods in the GOA (Fig. 11b, right panels).  
51
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
Figure 11b. 	Diet composition (left) and estimated consumption of prey (right) by Gulf of Alaska adult (top) 
and juvenile (bottom) pollock. 
In the AI, pollock diet data reflects a closer connection with open oceanic environments than 
in either the EBS or the GOA. Similar to the other ecosystems, euphausiids and copepods 
together make up the largest proportion of AI adult pollock diet (29% and 19%, respectively); 
however, it is only in the AI that adult pollock rely on mesopelagic forage fish in the family 
Myctophidae for 24% of their diet, and AI juvenile pollock have a lower proportion of 
euphausiids and a higher proportion of gelatinous filter feeders than in the other ecosystems (Fig. 
11c, right panels). As estimated by the food web model Sense routine, AI adult pollock consume 
between 100 and 900 thousand t of euphausiids annually, with similar ranges of myctophid and 
copepod consumption. Juvenile AI pollock consume an additional estimated 100 to 900 thousand 
t of copepods per year (Fig. 11c, right panels). The consumption estimates for AI pollock are an 
order of magnitude lower than those for EBS pollock, reflecting the lower pollock biomass in the 
AI relative to the EBS. However, it is important to note that the relatively lower early 1990s 
pollock biomass in the AI is concentrated in a smaller area of continental shelf and slope than in 
the EBS and GOA, which means that early 1990s pollock density in the AI is equivalent to the 
GOA for adult pollock, and greater than the GOA or the EBS density for juveniles (Fig. 12).  
52
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
Figure 11c. Diet composition (left) and estimated consumpt ion of prey (right) by Aleutian Islands adult (top) 
and juvenile (bottom) pollock. 
Figure 12. Comparison of adult (left) and juvenile (right) pollock density in t/km 2 between ecosystems in the 
early 1990s in the Aleutian Islands, eastern Bering Sea, and Gulf of Alaska.  
53
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
Comparing the food web model results for a single species, pollock, in the EBS, GOA, and AI 
demonstrates the utility of food web modeling for supplementing traditional single species 
models for commercially fished species. Viewing fisheries within the context of predator-prey 
relationships provides a comprehensive view of fishing impacts beyond target species which is 
not possible within the current single target species context. Evaluating the predator prey 
relationships for commercially important species such as pollock improves fishery sustainability 
through a fuller accounting of mortality sources and prey species contributing to production 
which are not considered in traditional single species models. In addition, strong relationships 
between fished species identified by food web modeling may imply that separately managed 
species might benefit from more coordinated management. All of these insights contribute an 
ecosystem based fishery management objective of maintaining the relationships in a marine 
ecosystem, including the economic relationships based on present and future commercial species 
sustainability. 
For fished prey species such as pollock, food web modeling suggests that different assessment 
or management strategies might be considered for the same species in different ecosystems. The 
AI food web model shows that in the early 1990s, fishing mortality was a larger proportion of 
total mortality for pollock than predation mortality. This suggests that fishery managers had 
control over the dominant source of AI pollock mortality. This was not the case in the EBS and 
the GOA, where predation mortality estimated to be greater than fishing mortality in food web 
models. The key difference between the EBS and GOA is that the dominant pollock predation 
mortality came from different sources. In the EBS, pollock cannibalism is the dominant source of 
pollock mortality; this sets up a potentially complex interaction between fishing mortality on 
adult pollock and its affects on pollock cannibalism, which is addressed to some extent in the 
single species stock assessment for EBS pollock through the use of the Ricker stock recruitment 
curve (Ianelli et al. 2005). 
In contrast with EBS and AI pollock, the GOA food web model shows that the overwhelming 
majority of explained pollock mortality is from predation by arrowtooth flounder, cod, and 
halibut, rather than pollock cannibalism or fishing. This suggests that for GOA pollock, reducing 
fishing mortality may have little impact on their population trajectory, contrary to conventional 
fishing theory. However, lack of control does not imply lack of responsibility. It also suggests 
that increased fishing mortality might have a greater than expected effect if the population 
collapses under the combined effects of high predation mortality and increased fishing mortality. 
A further implication of the GOA food web model is that if pollock’s predator populations 
change substantially, then predation mortality would likely change with them; in other words, the 
single species stock assessment assumption of constant natural mortality for pollock is not 
supported by food web modeling. This was initially addressed in Hollowed et al. (2000b), but 
that work has not been formally incorporated to date within the pollock assessment used to 
establish annual quotas. Finally, in the GOA pollock are strongly linked through predation 
mortality to other managed species, in particular halibut and cod. Halibut and cod differ from 
pollock in that fishing accounts for the majority of explained mortality for both species (Fig. 6 
and Fig. 13 below), suggesting that management actions affecting fishing mortality for halibut 
and cod may in turn affect pollock mortality in the GOA. Overall, food web modeling indicates 
where commercially important species might benefit from some coordination of management.  
54
 
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
3.3 Ecosystem Indicators and Statistics 
In this section, we transition from food web model results comparing a single species across 
ecosystems to results comparing ecosystem characteristics from single and multispecies 
perspectives. In the first example, we examine the different ecosystem roles of a single 
influential commercially fished predator species, Pacific cod (Gadus morhua). In the second 
example, we demonstrate how the food web model can be used to estimate the relative 
importance of different forage species in each ecosystem, and provide estimates of biomass 
based on predator consumption as alternatives to our current relatively poor survey biomass 
estimates for selected forage fish and epibenthic prey. The third section compares standard 
indicators of ecosystem condition and function.  
3.3.1 Different ecosystem roles of Pacific cod 
Pacific cod are commercially important in all three ecosystems, and are also important 
predators in the EBS, GOA, and AI. While they are managed similarly in all three ecosystems, 
food web modeling suggests key differences in cod’s ecosystem role in the AI, BS, and GOA. 
The first key difference between ecosystems relates to cod’s relative density in its continental 
shelf habitats in each system: because the AI has a much smaller area of shelf relative to the 
GOA and BS, the smaller absolute biomass of cod in this area translates into a higher density in 
t/km
2 relative to the density in the BS and GOA (Fig. 13, left panel). Although the density of cod 
differs between systems, the food web model estimates that the relative effects of fishing and 
predation mortality are similar between the AI, EBS, and GOA: cod have relatively more fishing 
mortality than predation mortality in all three ecosystems (Fig. 13, right panel). This suggests 
that changing fishing mortality is likely to affect cod population trajectories; therefore, we may 
ask what ecosystem effects changes in cod mortality might cause in each ecosystem. 
Figure 13. Comparative biomass density (left) and mort ality sources (right) for Pacific cod in the Aleutian 
Islands, eastern Bering Sea, and Gulf of Alaska ecosystems. 
To determine the potential ecosystem effects of changing total cod mortality, we first examine 
the diet data collected for cod and mortality estimates resulting from each food web model. 
Pacific cod have an extremely varied diet in all three ecosystems (Fig. 14, left panels). In both 
the EBS and GOA, pollock are a major diet item for cod (26% and 19% of diet, respectively), 
55
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
but in the AI Atka mackerel and sculpins are the predominant fish prey for cod (15% of diet 
each), with pollock comprising less than 5% of the diet. In all three ecosystems, Pandalid and 
non-Pandalid shrimp and various crabs are important prey, but other major prey items differ by 
ecosystem and seem to relate to the relative importance of benthic and pelagic pathways in each 
ecosystem as discussed above in section 3.1.3. Commerically important crab species such as 
snow crab (C. opilio) and Tanner crab (C. bairdi) make up 9% of cod diets in the EBS and GOA, 
but less than 3% in the AI, reflecting the stronger benthic energy flow in the EBS and GOA. In 
contrast, squids make up over 6% of cod diets in the AI, but are very small proportions of diets 
in the EBS and GOA, reflecting the stronger pelagic energy flow in the AI. Myctophids are also 
found in cod diets only in the AI, reflecting the oceanic nature of the food web there. Cod are 
clearly opportunistic predators in all three ecosystems, feeding on a variety of fish and 
invertebrates, and scavenging as well. Fishery offal makes up 3-7% of cod diets in all systems, 
indicating that while fishing causes cod mortality, it also contributes to cod production (although 
much fishery offal comes from fisheries directed at pollock, not cod).  
Mortality sources estimated by the food web models for cod are similar when comparing 
fisheries, but different when comparing predators between the EBS, GOA, and AI. In all three 
ecosystems, the trawl and longline fisheries for cod were the largest mortality sources for cod in 
the early 1990s (Fig. 14, right panels). The next largest source of cod mortality is the pollock 
trawl fishery in the EBS, the cod pot fishery in the GOA, and the directed Atka mackerel (“Other 
groundfish”) fishery in the AI, which retains incidentally caught cod. In the EBS and GOA, 
pollock and halibut predation rank next, and in the AI, adult and juvenile Steller sea lion 
predation represents the largest single source of predation mortality for cod. Cod cannibalism is a 
significant source of cod mortality only in the EBS, and flatfish trawl fisheries, halibut predation 
and skate predation round out the large cod mortality sources in that ecosystem. In the GOA, 
sperm whales, sea lions, and dogfish, along with flatfish and halibut fisheries, account for most 
remaining cod mortality. Therefore, we see groundfish-dominated predation mortality sources 
for cod in the EBS, sea-lion dominated predation mortality in the AI, and a mixture of groundfish 
and marine mammal predation on cod in the GOA.  
56
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 14. Comparison of Pacific co d diet (left) and mortality sources (right) for the Eastern Bering Sea 
(top), Gulf of Alaska (center) and Aleutian Islands (bottom) ecosystems.  
After comparing the different diet compositions and predators of cod in each ecosystem, we 
can integrate these results with information on uncertainty in the food web using the Sense 
routines and a perturbation analysis with each model food web. Two questions are important in 
determining the ecosystem role of cod: who are cod important to, and who are important to cod? 
57
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
First, the importance of cod to other groups within the EBS, GOA, and AI ecosystems was 
assessed using a model simulation analysis where cod survival was decreased (mortality was 
increased) by a small amount, 10%, over 50 years to determine the potential effects on other 
living groups. This analysis also incorporated the uncertainty in model parameters using the 
Sense routines, resulting in ranges of possible outcomes which are portrayed as 50% confidence 
intervals (boxes in Fig. 15) and 95% confidence intervals (error bars in Fig. 15). Species showing 
the largest median changes from baseline conditions are presented in descending order from left 
to right. Therefore, the largest change resulting from a 10% decrease in cod survival in all 
ecosystems is a decrease in adult cod biomass, as might have been expected from such a 
perturbation. However, the decrease in biomass resulting from the same perturbation is different 
between the EBS, GOA, and AI: the 50% intervals range from a 7-11% decrease in the AI, to a 
7-17% decrease in the EBS, to a 6-27% decrease in the GOA (Fig. 15). This suggests that in 
addition to the differences between the three ecosystems in terms of cod diets and mortality 
sources, there are differences in uncertainty between systems, with the GOA having the highest 
uncertainty in the outcome of the cod manipulation.  
The simulated decrease in cod survival affects the fisheries for cod similarly in the three 
ecosystems. After the decreased adult cod biomass, the next largest effect of the perturbation 
predicted by the models is a decrease in the “biomass” (catch) of the pot, longline, and trawl 
fisheries targeting adult cod in the EBS and GOA ecosystems (Fig. 15, top and center panels). In 
the AI ecosystem model, adult sablefish are predicted to have a larger change from the cod 
manipulation than the fisheries, although the predicted increase in sablefish biomass is much 
more uncertain than the predicted decrease in fishery catch in the AI (bottom panel, Fig. 15). We 
discuss the sablefish result in detail below; for this discussion, we note that the cod fisheries in 
the AI are behaving similarly to the cod fisheries in the EBS and GOA after the simulated 
decrease in cod survival. Since cod fisheries are extremely specialized predators of cod, it makes 
sense that they are most sensitive to changes in the survival of cod in each ecosystem. It is 
notable that none of the other predators of cod showed a significant sensitivity to a 10% decrease 
in cod survival. Pollock, halibut, and sea lions ranked highest as non-fishery mortality sources of 
cod in the EBS, GOA, and AI, respectively, but none of these species were predicted to have 
significant changes in biomass in any ecosystem in this analysis: the 50% interval for change in 
halibut in the EBS and GOA includes zero change, and neither EBS pollock nor AI sea lions 
showed enough change from the baseline condition to be included in the plots. While these 
predators may cause significant cod mortality in each system, this analysis suggests that none of 
them are dependent on cod to the extent that small changes in cod survival affect their biomass in 
a predictable manner. It may be that these predator species would react more strongly to larger 
changes in cod survival; this could be further analyzed with different perturbation analyses.  
In contrast with the predators of cod, a 10% decrease in cod survival is predicted to change 
the biomass of some cod prey, and even some species not directly connected to cod. In the EBS, 
greenling biomass is predicted to increase as a result of the perturbation, as is Tanner and king 
crab biomass, albeit with less certainty (Fig. 15, top panel). In the GOA all results are less 
certain, but Tanner crab and sculpin biomass are predicted to increase with decreased cod 
survival. In the AI, a larger set of species appear to react more strongly to increases in cod 
mortality than in the other two systems: sablefish, rex sole, arrowtooth flounder, and sleeper 
sharks are all predicted to increase in biomass in addition to greenlings and small sculpins (Fig. 
15). Of these, only rex sole, greenlings and other sculpins are direct cod prey; the change in adult 
sablefish and adult arrowtooth biomass apparently arises from reduced cod predation mortality 
58
 
 
  
 
  
    
on the juveniles of each species in the AI ecosystem model: cod cause 80% of juvenile sablefish 
and juvenile arrowtooth mortality in the AI model. Sleeper sharks are neither predators nor prey 
of cod in the AI, suggesting that decreased cod survival has strong indirect effects in this 
ecosystem. Some of these differences in species sensitivity to cod mortality arise from the 
differences in cod diet in each system, but it seems likely that the higher sensitivity of multiple 
species to cod in the AI may also be due to cod’s high biomass per unit area there relative to the 
EBS and GOA. This in turn suggests that in the AI there may be stronger potential ecosystem 
effects of cod fishing than in the other two systems. 
59
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15.  	Effect of cod on other species: eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian 
Islands (bottom). 
60 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
To determine which groups were most important to cod in each ecosystem, we conducted the 
inverse of the analysis presented above. In this simulation, each species group in the ecosystem 
had survival reduced by 10% and the system was allowed to adjust over 30 years. The strongest 
median effects on EBS, GOA, and AI adult cod are presented in Figure 16. The largest effect on 
adult cod was the reduction in biomass resulting from the reduced survival of juvenile cod, 
followed by the expected direct effect, reduced biomass of adult cod in response to reduced 
survival of adult cod, in all three ecosystems (Fig. 16). Beyond these direct single species effects, 
cod appear most sensitive in all ecosystems to bottom up effects from both pelagic and benthic 
production pathways (small phytoplankton and benthic detritus). However, the bottom up effect 
is most pronounced in the AI, where the upper 95% intervals for the percent change of cod 
indicate that cod biomass will almost certainly decrease as a result of decreased survival of small 
phytoplankton, benthic detritus, and large phytoplankton (Fig. 16). In contrast, the EBS model 
prediction is that cod biomass is likely to decrease from decreased survival of small 
phytoplankton and benthic detritus, but the detritus 95% intervals cross the x-axis indicating that 
no change is also a possible outcome. In the GOA, there is considerable uncertainty in the effect 
of reduced small phytoplankton and benthic detritus survival on cod biomass, with 95% intervals 
both above and below the “no change” x-axis (Fig. 16).  
In addition to increased uncertainty in the GOA, complex species interactions are more 
apparent than in the EBS and AI in this analysis. Reduced survival of juvenile and adult 
arrowtooth flounder in the GOA appear likely to have positive effects on cod biomass. Adult 
arrowtooth are only minor predators of adult cod, but cause an estimated 19% of the mortality on 
juvenile cod in the GOA (Fig. 17). In addition, arrowtooth cause the majority of pollock 
mortality (Fig. 10b), which is the major prey of cod in the GOA (Fig. 14, center left). Arrowtooth 
are also estimated to cause the majority of capelin mortality (Fig. 18) and a substantial amount of 
the mortality for pandalid shrimp (Fig.19), also cod prey in the GOA. It is difficult to determine 
whether the simulated reduced arrowtooth survival benefits cod more by releasing predation on 
juvenile cod, by releasing predation on cod’s major prey, or through a combination of effects.  
Aside from arrowtooth flounder in the GOA, there are few groups in the ecosystem which 
appear to benefit cod through reduced survival. In general, reduced “survival” (lower catch) of 
fisheries means more cod in the EBS, GOA, and AI. In the EBS and GOA, reduced survival of 
other sculpins may increase cod biomass to some extent (Fig. 16), which may seem 
counterintuitive given that reduced cod survival appeared to increase other sculpin biomass in 
the GOA and AI (Fig. 15). While adult cod eat other sculpins, other sculpins in turn eat juvenile 
cod in both the EBS and GOA (Fig. 17), likely accounting for the results shown in Figure 16.  
61
 
 
 
  
Figure 16. Species important to cod: eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian Islands 
(bottom). 
62 
 
 
  
 
Figure 17.  	 Juvenile cod mortality sources: Eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian 
Islands (bottom). 
63 
 
 
 
Figure 18. Capelin mortality sources: Eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian Islands 
(bottom). 
64 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Pandalid mortality sources : Eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian 
Islands (bottom). 
65 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The results of these perturbation analyses suggest that the regional level of management 
applied to Pacific cod should be modified to account for differences between ecosystems. As a 
commercially important species, Pacific cod are studied and assessed separately between the 
GOA and BSAI areas, but with similar management objectives. The food web relationships of 
cod are demonstrably different between the EBS, GOA, and AI ecosystems, with perhaps the 
largest contrast between the EBS and AI, where they are currently assessed and managed 
identically. The impacts of changing cod survival (and by extension, fishing mortality) differ by 
ecosystem as well, with the impacts felt most strongly and with highest certainty in the AI 
ecosystem according to this analysis. Therefore, it seems that the cod fishery in the AI should be 
managed separately from that in the EBS to ensure that any potential ecosystem effects of 
changing fishing mortality might be monitored at the appropriate scale. 
3.3.2 Consumption differences between ecosystems: forage base 
In our second example of ecosystem indicators derived from the food web models, we 
compare estimated consumption of forage species by predators in the EBS, GOA, and AI 
ecosystems. In comparing consumption of forage species, we see key differences between 
ecosystems in energy flow supporting the predator species, including the groundfish which are 
targets of commercial fisheries. For some forage species we have some knowledge of biomass in 
each system, while for others these consumption estimates represent the best available 
information on their potential abundance in the ecosystem. Species groups at each trophic level 
were designed to be comparable across ecosystems, and data poor groups had similar 
assumptions applied, so differences in consumption of these species groups are attributable 
primarily to the diet data collected for the data rich predators in the ecosystems.  
First we compare consumption of forage species at trophic level (TL) 2.5; these groups feed 
on primary producers, detritus, and microbes. While all of our TL consumption comparisons 
reflect the relative strength of benthic and pelagic energy pathways discussed in Section 3.1.3, 
consumption of TL 2.5 groups in particular reflects the major differences between ecosystems. 
Figure 20 shows that in the EBS, consumption of TL 2.5 groups has the highest proportion of 
benthic forage species groups of any system: benthic amphipods, bivalves, crustaceans, 
miscellaneous worms and polychaetes account for half of all consumed species groups at TL 2.5 
in the EBS. In contrast, the AI consumption of TL 2.5 groups is 87% pelagic forage; primarily 
copepods (49%) and euphausiids (33%). The relative consumption from benthic and pelagic 
pathways in the GOA is intermediate between the benthic EBS and the pelagic AI; 26% benthic 
and 74% pelagic forage consumed from TL 2.5 in the GOA (Fig. 20). 
66
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
    
  
  
 
 
 
 
Pelagic Pelagic Gelatinous Benthic Misc. Mysids Amphipods Mysids Amphipods filter feeders Amphipods Crustacean 1% 2%1% Mysids 1% 1% Pteropods Benthic 7% 2%Biv alv es 
Benthic Gelatinous Amphipods 1% 1% 
Gelatinous 2% 
Amphipods filter feeders 12% Misc. worms filter feeders Euphausiids 21% 1% 1% 
19% 2%Bivalv es 
5% Polychaetes 
2% 
Euphausiids Misc. 
Crustacean 
4% 
31% Euphausiids 
Biv alv es 33%Misc. worms 8% 2% 
Misc. 
Crustacean
 
14%
 
Copepods Copepods Misc. worms 
30% Polychaetes 49%
 2% 
Polychaetes Copepods 3% 
4% 37% 
TL 2.5 EBS TL 2.5 GOA TL 2.5 AI 
Figure 20. Consumption of groups at TL 2.5 by predators in the Eastern Bering Sea (left), Gulf of Alaska 
(center), and Aleutian Islands (right).  
In all three ecosystems, historical or current field survey data were available to estimate 
biomass for 5 of the 18 TL 2.5 groups: anemones, corals, sea pens, sponges, and benthic 
urochordates (see Appendix A for details). In the EBS, additional data were available to estimate 
the biomass of bivalves and polychaetes. For all other groups, the consumption estimate converts 
to a biomass estimate when divided by each group’s P/B times the assumed EE of 0.80. These 
consumption-based biomass estimates were generally orders of magnitude higher than estimates 
derived from trawl surveys (Table 27). We note, however, that the groundfish trawl surveys were 
not designed to provide estimates of biomass for invertebrates or forage fish, and that food web 
model based biomass estimates for TL 2.5 groups are still highly uncertain. As TL of forage 
groups increases, the certainty of food-web model consumption based biomass estimates may 
increase with the reliability of diet information for data-rich groundfish species (see below).  
67
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 27. Comparison of food web model consumption-based biomass estimates with early 1990s trawl survey 
biomass estimates for selected forage species in the GOA, EBS, and AI. Italicized numbers for 
three EBS groups are provided for comparison only; the model t were based on survey t for EBS 
Bivalves, Polychaetes, and C. bairdi crabs.  
EBS EBS GOA GOA AI AI 
Group TL model tons survey tons model tons survey tons model tons survey tons 
Benthic Invertebrates 
Benthic Amphipods 2.5 6,258,080 n/a 1,712,771 n/a 423,494 n/a 
Bivalves 2.5 30,640,658 30,640,658 4,042,562 1,515 631,581 
Hydroids 2.5 128,643 n/a 30,664 n/a 2,115 n/a 
Misc. Crustacean 2.5 4,378,827 618,785 926 118,646 
Misc. worms 2.5 1,839,532 1,070,408 1 137,023 
Polychaetes 2.5 10,739,981 10,739,981 1,144,973 717 250,948 
NP shrimp 2.9 6,349,705 3,368,271 143 889,636 
Pandalidae 2.9 3,331,307 3,118,909 7,932 471,782 
Snails 2.9 407,168 315,625 252,115 1,409 64,534 
Hermit crabs 3.1 884,053 441,021 830,565 541 33,417 
Misc. crabs 3.1 360,147 48,187 507,177 1,058 78,872 
C. bairdi crabs 3.4 204,545 204,545 183,381 2,667 23,069 
Pelagic Zooplankton 
Copepods 2.5 11,122,056 n/a 6,380,644 n/a 3,805,384 n/a 
Euphausiids 2.5 7,841,619 n/a 5,884,061 n/a 2,802,328 n/a 
Fish Larvae 2.5 92,784 n/a 175,034 n/a 40,260 n/a 
Gelatinous filter feeders 2.5 226,235 n/a 170,823 n/a 179,737 n/a 
Mysids 2.5 5,779 n/a 1,103 n/a 128,487 n/a 
Pelagic Amphipods 2.5 348,099 n/a 274,105 n/a 367,304 n/a 
Pteropods 2.5 483,179 n/a 104,461 n/a 29,054 n/a 
Chaetognaths 2.9 763,250 n/a 394,139 n/a 92,417 n/a 
Forage Fish 
Bathylagidae 3.5 80,047 n/a 21,512 n/a 25,364 n/a 
Capelin 3.5 613,714 1,840 2,050,112 137 203,697 0 
Eulachon 3.5 273,583 6,719 335,636 30,229 197,608 2,425 
Myctophidae 3.5 394,664 n/a 185,269 n/a 1,473,317 n/a 
Oth. managed forage 3.5 521,895 1,288 415,443 753 217,139 4 
Oth. pelagic smelt 3.5 247,139 n/a 187,399 30,409 197,156 n/a 
Sandlance 3.5 1,229,948 34 712,880 33 213,509 127 
Eelpouts 3.6 1,173,860 39,335 312,102 446 14,554 392 
Groups between TL 2.6 and 3.4 are primarily benthic invertebrate groups in all three model 
ecosystems, with the exception of the pelagic zooplankton group chaetognaths. Nevertheless, the 
differences in consumption from benthic and pelagic pathways are evident in ecosystem 
comparisons at these trophic levels as well: chaetognath consumption accounts for one third of 
AI consumption at these TLs, compared with only 13-15% in the EBS and GOA (Fig. 21). 
Commercial crabs account for much more of the consumption in the EBS (11%) compared with 
the other systems (2-3%). Consumption of pandalid (commercial) shrimp is proportionally 
highest in the GOA, but non-pandalid (NP) shrimp consumption is high in all three systems, and 
is dominant (37%) in the EBS.  
68
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Scyphozoid Scyphozoid Scyphozoid 
Chaetognath Jellies Chaetognath Jellies Jellies
 
s 1% s 0% 0%
 
13% 15%
 
Commercial NP shrimp Chaetognath 
8% 
crabs 30% NP shrimp sCommercial NP shrimp 3% 33% 33%crabs 37%
 
11%
 Misc. crabs 
6% 
Misc. crabs Commercial 3% Hermit crabs crabs 
11% 2%Hermit crabs 
7% 
Pandalidae Misc. crabs 
4% Pandalidae 20% Snails Pandalidae Snails 18% 7% 28% Hermit crabs 8%
 
2%
 Snails 
TL 2.6-3.4 AI 
Figure 21. Consumption of groups between TL 2.6 and TL 3.4 by predators in the Eastern Bering Sea (left), 
Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian Islands (right).  
Because the biomass estimates reported in Table 27 depend on the consumption estimates, we 
determined which diet information is influential in estimating the consumption of each forage 
species by examining the mortality sources for each forage species. Species causing the most 
mortality are responsible for the most consumption within the context of the food web model. In 
each ecosystem, the primary consumers of the most important forage species above TL 2.5 are 
groundfish, so the consumption estimates are based on time- and area-specific food habits 
information in each ecosystem. For example, pollock and cod alone account for over 60% of 
pandalidae mortality in the EBS and over 50% in the GOA models (Fig. 19), and these predators’ 
diets are estimated from detailed field-collected food habits data. Similarly, other sculpins, 
grenadiers and pollock account for over 50% of NP shrimp mortality in the EBS (Fig. 22). 
Pollock, grenadiers, other sculpins, miscellaneous deep groundfish and cod also explain the 
majority of NP shrimp mortality in the GOA and AI (Fig. 22).  
TL 2.6-3.4 EBS TL 2.6-3.4 GOA 
69
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
Figure 22. Mortality sources for NP shrimp in the Eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and 
Aleutian Islands (bottom). 
Information quality increases further when estimating consumption and biomass of forage 
species at TL 3.5, including groups in the NPFMC’s “Forage Fish” management category, 
70 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
because data-rich groundfish consume these forage species. Each ecosystem has a different 
dominant forage fish according to consumption estimates. In the EBS, the most consumed forage 
fish is juvenile pollock (48% of consumption, Figure 23), while capelin are most consumed 
(39%) in the GOA, and myctophids are most consumed (49%) in the AI. Sand lance are the 
second most consumed forage fish in both the EBS and the GOA, at 14-15% of total 
consumption of TL 3.5. In the AI, juvenile pollock are second most consumed (14%). In the 
EBS, approximately half of the consumption of juvenile pollock is attributable to adult pollock 
cannibalism (which accounts for nearly 40% of juvenile pollock mortality, Fig.10a). Adult and 
juvenile arrowtooth flounder predation combined accounts for nearly half of all capelin 
consumption in the GOA and more than one third of capelin total mortality; adult pollock also 
contribute substantially to capelin mortality (Fig. 18). Predation by pollock and grenadiers 
together account for nearly two thirds of myctophid consumption in the AI. Atka mackerel 
account for a majority of juvenile pollock mortality in the AI (Fig. 10c).  
Roundfish Bathylagidae 
Flatfish 
Bathylagidae 
1% Eulachon Roundfish Eelpouts 2% 1% 
3% 
TL 3.5 EBS 
1% 
Flatfish 
Capelin 
39% 
W. 
Pollock_Juv 
12% 
Sandlance 
14% 
4% 
Eelpouts 
3% 
Oth. 
Managed Oth. pelagic 1% 
Myctophidae 
forage 
8% 
Herring_Juv 
6% 
Herring 
1% 
3% 
Eulachon 
6%	 
Capelin Capelin Eelpouts	 Myctophidae Sandlance 7%3% 7% Eulachon 7% 5% 7% 
Oth. 6% 
W.managed 
Pollock_Juv forage Sandlance 
14% 6%15% 
Oth. pelagic
 
smelt
 
3%
 
Oth. pelagic Herring smelt 1% 6% 
Herring_Juv Oth. 
W. 	 1% managed 
Pollock_Juv forage Myctophidae 
48% 7%	 49% 
smelt 
3% TL 3.5 GOA TL 3.5 AI 
Figure 23.  	 Consumption of groups at TL 3.5 by predators in the Eastern Bering Sea (left), Gulf of Alaska 
(center), and Aleutian Islands (right).  
The NPFMC Forage fish management category includes euphausiids, capelin, eulachon and 
other smelts, bathylagids, myctophids, sand lance, and other managed forage including sandfish 
and sticheids. In all systems, euphausiid consumption accounts for 77-78% of all consumption in 
these selected groups. All forage fish are protected under the Forage Fish amendment prohibiting 
directed fishing, but this analysis of consumption estimates within the management category 
shows that different forage fish species are important in each ecosystem. In this subset of the full 
TL 3.5 forage base, the benthic-associated sand lance are the most consumed forage fish in the 
EBS, the coastal pelagic capelin dominate forage fish consumption in the GOA, and the oceanic 
pelagic myctophids are the dominant forage consumed in the AI (Fig. 24). Northern rock sole 
account for a third of sand lance consumption in EBS; the primary consumers of GOA capelin 
and AI myctophids are as described above.  
71
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
Bathylagidae Bathylagidae 
1% 1%
Bathylagidae 
Oth. pelagic 2% Oth. pelagic Oth. pelagic 
smelt Oth. smelt Oth. smelt Capelin managed7% 5% managed 8% 8%
 
Oth. Capelin forage
 forage 11% Eulachon managed 18% 9% 8%forage
 
16%
 
Sandlance 
8% 
Eulachon Sandlance
 
8% 18%
 Capelin 
51% 
Myctophidae Myctophidae
 
12%
 5% 
Sandlance Eulachon
 
37% 9%
 
EBS GOA AI 
Figure 24. Consumption of “forage fish” management category in the Eastern Bering Sea (left), Gulf of 
Alaska (center), and Aleutian Islands (right).  
The management implications of this analysis differ by ecosystem, both because of the current 
management of the species involved and due to the physical differences between systems 
implied by the results. First we discuss management of the species: in the EBS, pollock, the 
primary “forage fish” is also a primary commercially fished species as an adult. Therefore, in the 
EBS, the sustainability of the pollock fishery as well as a large proportion of predator (including 
adult pollock) consumption depends on continued juvenile pollock production. In the GOA and 
AI the primary forage fish, capelin and myctophids, are both given protected status by the 
NPFMC forage fish FMP amendment, which prohibits directed fishing for all species in the 
forage fish category. While this protected status was designed to minimize any potentially 
negative direct effects of fishing on the primary forage species in the AI and GOA, there is also 
little information available to study the fluctuations in forage resources in these systems 
precisely because they are non-commercial species.  
These differences in data quality ultimately affect model-based prediction. It is 
straightforward to demonstrate the sensitivity of other species in the ecosystem to each of these 
influential forage groups using a simulation analysis where the survival of a given group is 
decreased and the equilibrium response of other groups is evaluated. Fluctuating myctophid 
survival most clearly impacts AI groups while it has little impact in the EBS or GOA (Fig. 25); 
similarly capelin fluctuations are most influential in the GOA, to a lesser extent the EBS, and are 
least influential in the AI (Fig. 26). Juvenile pollock fluctuations affect multiple groups in each 
ecosystem, but effects are strongest and most certain in the EBS (Fig. 27). In addition, the 
uncertainty in predictions for AI myctophids and GOA capelin are much higher than for EBS 
juvenile pollock. Because pollock are both an important commercial species and an important 
forage species in the EBS, we may have a unique opportunity to study the ecosystem dynamics 
surrounding fluctuating forage fish availability there because pollock recruitment is closely 
monitored for stock assessment purposes. However, the sensitivity of other species in the AI and 
GOA to myctophids and capelin, respectively, suggest that further study of these non-fishery 
resources would be a priority for ecosystem-based analyses there. 
Myctophidae 
58% 
72
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 25. Influence of myctophids in the Eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian 
Islands (bottom) food webs. 
73 
 
 
 
  
Figure 26. Influence of capelin in the Eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian Islands 
(bottom) food webs. 
74 
 
 
 
 
Figure 27. Influence of juvenile pollock in the Eastern Bering Sea (top), Gulf of Alaska (center), and Aleutian 
Islands (bottom) food webs. 
75 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
. 
Although the primary forage fish consumed in the AI and the GOA are similar form a 
management standpoint, they represent very different forage from a biological/physical 
standpoint. Capelin are primarily a coastal, continental shelf species, while myctophids are an 
oceanic, deepwater family of forage fish. This suggests that different climatic and oceanographic 
factors would affect production for the forage base in each ecosystem. Therefore, different 
climate and physical indicators might be appropriate signals of changing forage production in the 
AI as opposed to the GOA. Overall, using food web model-based estimates of consumption to 
characterize the forage base in each ecosystem may help tailor physical indicators to each 
ecosystem. Consumption patterns confirm that the EBS is more self-contained shelf oriented 
ecosystem with equal benthic and pelagic energy inputs, with little oceanic influence. In contrast, 
the AI is mostly open ocean-influenced. Ecosystem boundaries may be more difficult to discern 
in an open, oceanic food web from an energetic perspective. The GOA food web seems 
intermediate, with an oceanic influence but also localized benthic and coastal pelagic forage 
base. 
3.3.3 Trophodynamic Comparisons of the EBS, AI, and GOA 
The previous sections used the ecosystem models to provide context for single species 
management by evaluating the roles of different commercially important and forage species 
within each ecosystem. In this section, we give more emphasis to whole-system indicators of 
ecosystem structure and function to compare and contrast the three ecosystems. Numerous 
ecosystem indicators have been suggested in the literature (e.g., Rice 2000, Rice 2003, Cury et 
al. 2005). We select two simple indicators, biomass and consumption, to characterize basic 
differences in structure and potential energy flow between the systems. A third indicator uses 
calculated energy flow between trophic levels to estimate the “footprint” of each group, 
including fisheries, in terms of the amount of energy removed from the ecosystem by that group. 
The objective of these comparisons is to provide a basis for system-level evaluation of ecosystem 
state and fishery impacts, and to develop potential management thresholds appropriate to the 
distinct structure of each Alaskan ecosystem.  
3.3.3.1	 Biomass at Trophic Level 
Relative biomass of major species groups within the ecosystem is the most basic ecosystem 
indicator, and is most often used to evaluate ecosystem change over time (Cury et al. 2005). 
However, it is also instructive to compare biomass of similar groups between ecosystems to 
evaluate ecosystem differences which might suggest fishery management methods tailored to 
each ecosystem. Here, we compare biomass density (t/km
2) of groups between ecosystems 
because the three systems are so different in areal extent. In the first comparison, we simply plot 
biomass density at trophic level (TL) to examine whether groups at similar levels in each system 
have similar biomass densities. Then, we compare the relationship between biomass density and 
TL for each ecosystem using linear regressions of log biomass density on TL. Residuals from 
these regressions indicate which groups have the greatest anomalies from the overall 
relationship. Because the three models were built to have comparable groups, and identical 
assumptions were made to parameterize certain groups where data were lacking, we might 
expect considerable similarity in the biomass densities of many groups at each trophic level. 
Nevertheless, for key species groups biomass density at TL differs greatly between systems.  
76
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5
TL
Biomass density (t/km2)
AI
EBS
GOA
copepods
copepods
bivalves
euphausiids
NP shrimp
Pandalids
myctophids
pollockeuphausiids
Atka mack
capelin
pollock
squids
grenadiers
arrowtooth
cod halibut
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5
TL
Biomass density (t/km2)
AI
EBS
GOA
copepods
copepods
bivalves
euphausiids
NP shrimp
Pandalids
myctophids
pollockeuphausiids
Atka mack
capelin
pollock
squids
grenadiers
arrowtooth
 
 
 
   
In a simple plot of biomass density at TL, differences between the AI and the other two 
systems are apparent for low TL groups such as copepods and euphausiids. There are no biomass 
estimates for any of these groups in any ecosystem, so these biomass densities are estimated by 
consumption requirements in each ecosystem. The much higher estimated densities of copepods 
and euphausiids in the AI (Fig. 28) likely reflects the dominance of pelagic energy flow relative 
to the other two systems that was discussed in Sections 3.1.2 and 3.3.2. Conversely, the density 
of EBS bivalves which is the same order of magnitude as AI copepods and euphausiids, reflects 
the dominant benthic energy flow in the EBS. Unlike the copepod and euphausiid density 
estimates, the density of bivalves in the EBS is based on field survey data (McDonald et al. 1981, 
and see Appendix A).  
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 Biomass density (t/km2) 
AI 
EBS 
GOA 
copepods 
copepods 
bivalves 
euphausiids 
NP shrimp 
Pandalids 
myctophids 
pollock euphausiids 
Atka mack 
capelin 
pollock 
squids 
grenadiers 
arrowtooth 
cod halibut 
2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 
TL 
Figure 28.  Biomass density (t/km2) for species groups in the Aleutian Islands (diamonds), Eastern Bering Sea 
(squares), and Gulf of Alaska (triangles) ecosystem models, trophic levels (TL) 2.5 through 5.5. 
77
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
The differences between systems again become pronounced above TL 3.5, although the 
systems are remarkably similar in biomass density for groups between TL 2.5 and 3.5. In 
contrast to the TL 2.5 copepods, euphausiids, and bivalves, there are few differences between the 
AI, EBS, and GOA in terms of shrimp group biomass at TL 2.9 (Fig. 28). Because shrimp groups 
lack biomass estimates in all three models, this similarity in biomass density reflects the similar 
consumption demand for shrimp in each ecosystem. Above TL 3.5, there is a mix of groups with 
field-based biomass estimates and consumption-based biomass estimates, but differences 
between ecosystems are clear from both types of groups. Myctophids, squids, and capelin are 
important forage groups with consumption-based biomass estimates; these groups have distinctly 
high biomass in the AI (myctophids and squids) and in the GOA (capelin; Fig. 28). 
Commercially important forage groups in each ecosystem (adult pollock and adult Atka 
mackerel) have biomass densities based on extensive surveys and stock assessments. These field-
based estimates indicate that EBS pollock have remarkably high biomass, on the same order of 
magnitude as copepods and euphausiids in that ecosystem, and far higher than pollock in either 
the AI or GOA (although the TL of adult pollock is lower in the EBS than in the GOA and AI, 
indicating a different diet). The EBS pollock biomass density is the highest survey/assessment­
based density for any fish in the three ecosystems. The second highest survey/assessment-based 
fish density is for AI Atka mackerel. We note, however, that the high mid-TL fish densities 
measured and estimated in the AI are still far lower in magnitude than the lower TL copepod and 
euphausiid densities estimated in that ecosystem, unlike the pollock situation in the EBS. This 
suggests not just a different species biomass distribution between the AI and the EBS, but also a 
fundamentally different ecosystem structure, with a biomass-dominant mid-TL group in the EBS 
versus the apparent biomass dominance of low-TL zooplankton groups supporting moderately 
high fish biomass in the AI.  
Above TL 4, the species with relatively high biomass density are found in the GOA and AI 
model ecosystems. Cod, an important predator in all three ecosystems, does not display distinctly 
different biomass density between the GOA, EBS, and AI (Fig. 28). The primary difference is 
that AI cod have a higher TL, indicating a different diet (as described more fully above in 
Section 3.3.1). In the AI, the highest biomass density in any system above TL 4.5 is of a 
deepwater predator, grenadiers (Fig. 28). The biomass of grenadiers in the AI model is based on 
trawl survey estimated biomass from 1980s surveys which extended into the deepwater habitats 
inhabited by grenadiers (see Appendix A). Similarly to birds, marine mammals, sablefish, and 
pollock in the AI, a portion of the grenadier biomass and foraging activity occurs outside the area 
of the model as defined by the bottom trawl survey. The AI grenadier diet reflects the oceanic 
nature of this ecosystem in that it is dominated by myctophids (47%) and squid (45%). 
Therefore, this high density of grenadiers (along with pollock, birds, and marine mammals) is 
partially responsible for the high consumption-based estimates of densities for myctophids and 
squids in the AI, but all of these estimates can be viewed as reflecting imports from a wider area 
than is represented by the AI model area itself. While import of oceanic biomass by foraging 
animals may inflate consumption-based density estimates relative to the trawl-survey based 
model area, it is difficult to quantify how to alter the bounds of the AI model to best 
accommodate these oceanic imports; simply extending the model area to a deeper bathymetric 
contour does not address that imports are from pelagic habitats where animals do not necessarily 
distribute according to bottom depth. The implication for management is that unlike the EBS, the 
continental shelf surrounding the AI cannot be considered as a self-contained, closed ecosystem.  
78
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
In contrast with the oceanic-influenced AI, biomass distributions above TL 4 in the GOA 
reflect a dominance of predatory continental shelf species. Arrowtooth flounder biomass density 
in the GOA is the highest density above TL 4 in any of the three ecosystems (Fig. 28). This is 
especially notable considering that the biomass density of forage species in the GOA appears 
generally lower than in the AI (where the high grenadier biomass is “supported” by even higher 
squid and myctophid biomass) and roughly equal to or lower than the EBS (where the high 
pollock biomass does not appear to support similarly high biomass of predatory species). GOA 
arrowtooth flounder distribute their consumption over multiple moderate density prey, including 
capelin (22% of diet), euphausiids (17%), pollock (14% adult and 10% juvenile), and pandalid 
shrimp (10%). In addition to arrowtooth flounder, Pacific halibut are another high density GOA 
species above TL 4. This high predator biomass relative to forage biomass in the GOA 
distinguishes it structurally from the EBS and AI. 
While examining biomass distributions by TL demonstrates differences between systems for 
certain groups, regression analysis addresses more general structural differences, such as whether 
there is a fundamentally different biomass at a given TL between ecosystems. The relationship 
between (log) biomass density and TL appears similar for the GOA and AI models, while the 
EBS model relationship has a steeper negative slope (Fig. 29). Once again, the AI and EBS 
models are most different in terms of regression slope and intercept, with the GOA intermediate. 
All of these regressions are statistically significant (p<0.001) with R
2 fits ranging from 0.25 to 
0.36. However, there are not statistically significant differences between the parameters of these 
log biomass regressions, despite the visual differences in slope. Although we detect no 
fundamentally different relationship between biomass and TL between the ecosystems as 
modeled, improved information on low TL groups (where we elected to make common 
assumptions) might change this result. 
79
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 29.   Relationship of log biomass density (t/km 2) with trophic level (TL) in the Eastern Bering Sea, 
Gulf of Alaska and Aleutian Islands.  
Given the similar nature of the overall relationships between biomass density and TL between 
the models, the individual groups deviating most from these relationships provide further insight 
into commonalities and differences between the ecosystems. The residuals from each of these 
regressions delineate which species groups are at the extreme ends of the biomass scale at a 
given TL. Examining the ten most extreme residuals from each system’s regression supports the 
conclusions drawn above for high biomass species, but also shows which species have especially 
low biomass density in each system, a result not obvious from the simple plot shown in Figure 
28. In the EBS, pollock and cod are the two largest positive residuals from the regression, with 
adult pollock having the largest positive residual overall (Fig. 30a). In the AI, grenadiers, 
myctophids, Atka mackerel and pollock have the largest positive residuals, and in the GOA, 
arrowtooth flounder and Pacific halibut have the largest positive residuals (Fig. 30b and 30c). 
Negative residuals in each ecosystem represent the lowest biomass at a given TL. Several bird 
80
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
groups were consistently low across systems, and corals were low in the EBS and GOA, while 
sea pens were low in the AI and GOA (Fig. 30a-c). Fish larvae, a top-down balanced group 
consumed by jellyfish, made the top ten residuals with low values in the EBS and GOA. In the 
EBS, dusky rockfish, Dover sole and sea otters had low biomass density, as well as juvenile Atka 
mackerel (Fig. 30a). In the AI model, juvenile flatfish groups had extremely low biomass 
densities for their trophic level (Fig. 30b). In the GOA model, juvenile thornyheads and juvenile 
fur seals also had highly negative residuals (Fig. 30c).  
Figure 30a. 	 Regression residuals from the relationship of log biomass density with trophic level (TL) in the 
Eastern Bering Sea. Species groups with the largest residuals (most extreme biomass at a given 
TL) are labeled.  In the axis label, lm(logEBS~EBS.AvgTL) means the fitted values from the 
linear regression model where log biomass is predicted by trophic level. 
81
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Figure 30b.  	Regression residuals from the relationship of log biomass density with trophic level (TL) in the 
Aleutian Islands. Species groups with the largest residuals (most extreme biomass at a given TL) 
are labeled.  In the axis label, lm(logAI~AI.AvgTL) means the fitted values from the linear 
regression model where log biomass is predicted by trophic level. 
82
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 30c.  	Regression residuals from the relationship of log biomass density with trophic level (TL) in the 
Gulf of Alaska. Species groups with the largest residuals (most extreme biomass at a given TL) 
are labeled.  In the axis label, lm(logGOA~GOA.AvgTL) means the fitted values from the linear 
regression model where log biomass is predicted by trophic level. 
Given the extremely wide spread in values of biomass density at trophic level, the “outliers” 
in each ecosystem may be disproportionately influential or vulnerable, and therefore of 
management interest in the ecosystem context. The high-biomass groups identified by this 
analysis are different between systems, and suggest different structural properties (e.g., the 
pollock dominated EBS versus the predator dominated GOA). However, biomass distributions 
should be viewed as one component of a suite of ecosystem indictors to provide a more accurate 
assessment of ecosystem state (Rice 2000, 2003, Cury et al. 2005). For example, all three 
ecosystems have birds among the low biomass outliers, as well as structure forming benthic 
83
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
invertebrates such as corals and sea pens. This suggest that aggregate biomass-based indicators 
of ecosystem condition might undervalue these ecosystem components, which may have high 
consumption despite low biomass (birds) or contribute to ecosystem productivity in a non-
trophic way which is difficult to measure with a food web model (corals and sea pens). 
Therefore, we next examine consumption and finally fishery impact at each trophic level to 
provide a fuller suite of indicators for management.  
3.3.3.2	 Consumption at Trophic Level 
In addition to biomass per unit area, we compared total consumption/km2 of each group by 
trophic level. While comparing consumption is similar to comparing the biomass density for 
many species (because consumption = Q/B * B), the additional benefit in examining 
consumption is that the “consumption” of fisheries (catches) can be compared alongside the 
consumption of predators. We also note that this analysis is different from the analysis discussed 
above in Section 3.3.2 in that we now examine total consumption by a given predator group or 
fishery, rather than consumption of a given forage group by predators. The patterns of 
consumption at low TL largely reflect the biomass density patterns discussed above, so here we 
focus on consumption patterns for TL 3 and above.  
Aleutian Island model species groups have the highest consumption per unit area above TL 3. 
Myctophids, Atka mackerel and squids are all estimated to have consumption per unit area 
exceeding that of EBS pollock, the next highest consumer group in any model (Fig. 31). In the 
GOA, capelin are estimated to have the highest consumption above TL 3, followed by AI and 
GOA pollock, but both are well below the EBS pollock consumption estimate. Above TL 4, cod 
are estimated to have similar consumption in all three ecosystems, although as reflected above in 
the biomass at TL discussion, AI cod have a slightly higher TL relative to GOA and EBS cod, 
and a slightly higher consumption estimate as well. The highest consumption after cod for each 
ecosystem comes from very different sources: from arrowtooth flounder in the GOA, from 
grenadiers in the AI, and from the pollock trawl fishery in the EBS (where “consumption” = 
catch per unit area).  
84
 
 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6
TL
Consumption (t/km2)
AI
EBS
GOA
myctophids
pollock
Atka mack
capelin
pollock
squids
grenadiersarrowtooth
cod
pollock trawl
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
Consumption (t/km2) 
AI 
EBS 
GOA 
myctophids 
pollock 
Atka mack 
capelin 
pollock 
squids 
grenadiers arrowtooth 
cod 
pollock trawl 
3 3 . 5 4 4 . 5 5 5 . 5 
TL 
Figure 31. Total consumption and total catch (t/km 2) for species groups and fisheries in the Aleutian Islands 
(diamonds), Eastern Bering Sea (squares), and Gulf of Alaska (triangles) ecosystem models, 
trophic levels (TL) 3 through 5.5. 
As with the biomass at TL analysis discussed above, we applied regression analysis to 
addresses more general structural differences between ecosystems, such as whether there is a 
fundamentally different consumption at a given TL. Similar to the biomass relationships, the 
relationship between (log) consumption per area and TL appears similar for the GOA and AI 
models, while the EBS model relationship has a steeper negative slope (Fig. 32). All of these 
regressions are statistically significant (p<0.001) with R2 fits ranging from 0.26 to 0.39. 
However, there are not statistically significant differences between the parameters of these log 
consumption regressions, despite the visual differences in slope. Although we detect no 
fundamentally different relationship between consumption and TL between the ecosystems as 
modeled, as with the biomass relationships, improved information on low TL groups (where we 
elected to make common assumptions in the absence of data) might change this result. 
85
 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
Figure 32. Relationship of log consumption (t/km 2) with trophic level (TL) in the Eastern Bering Sea, Gulf 
of Alaska and Aleutian Islands. 
Similar to the analysis above presented for biomass relationships, we examine the individual 
groups deviating most from the consumption relationships shown in Figure 32 to provide further 
insight into commonalities and differences between the ecosystems. The residuals from each of 
these regressions delineate which species groups are at the extreme ends of the consumption 
scale at a given TL. Examining the ten most extreme residuals from each system’s regression 
supports the conclusions drawn above for high consumption species, but also shows which 
species have especially low consumption in each system.  
In the EBS, pelagic microbes, pollock, and benthic microbes are the three largest positive 
residuals from the regression, with pelagic microbes having the largest positive residual overall 
(Fig. 33a). It seems remarkable given the consumption estimates for microbes that the 
consumption of a fish group could be similarly high relative to its TL. In the AI, copepods and 
pelagic microbes have the largest positive residuals, and in the GOA, copepods, pelagic 
86
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
microbes, arrowtooth flounder and euphausiids have the largest positive residuals (Fig. 33 b and 
33 c, respectively). These groups with very large consumption for their TL appear consistent 
with our previous results; for example, the strong benthic energy pathway in the EBS relative to 
the other ecosystems is reflected in the appearance of high benthic microbial consumption only 
in the EBS. Only pelagic zooplankton groups rank highest in the positive consumption residuals 
in the AI, while a similar set of pelagic zooplankton plus arrowtooth flounder rank highest in the 
GOA. As with pollock in the EBS, it seems remarkable in the GOA that arrowtooth flounder’s 
consumption would be as high for its TL as high biomass, rapid turnover groups such as 
microbes and zooplankton. These results demonstrate the extent to which a single groundfish 
species is influential in a food web, and suggest that the trophic interactions of these influential 
species be monitored as one component of a suite of ecosystem indicators tailored to the EBS 
and GOA, especially since they are commercially exploited.  
Negative residuals in each ecosystem represent the lowest consumption at a given TL. While 
the biomass regressions presented above showed that bird groups were consistently low across 
systems, consumption regressions never have birds among the lowest groups at a given TL, 
because high seabird consumption rates combined with relatively low biomass still places 
consumption well within the range of that for other groups at a given TL. However, similar to the 
biomass at TL results, sea pens and corals had consistently low consumption in all three 
ecosystems (Fig. 33 a-c); this is consistent with relatively low biomass of both groups combined 
with relatively low consumption rates. The higher biomass of corals in the AI relative to the 
other two ecosystems is reflected in coral consumption that is closer to average consumption for 
that TL (Fig. 33b), whereas corals are extremely low outliers in the EBS and GOA (Figs. 33 a 
and c). In the EBS, dusky rockfish, Dover sole, juvenile Atka mackerel and sea otters had low 
biomass density, and all of these groups except for sea otters had low consumption for their TL 
as well (Fig. 33 a). Like birds, sea otters and other marine mammals have low biomass but a high 
consumption rate, so comparing consumption gives a more accurate picture of group influence 
(or lack thereof) than biomass alone. Similarly, in the GOA model, juvenile thornyheads and 
juvenile fur seals had highly negative biomass residuals, but only thornyheads remain low in 
consumption residuals (Fig. 33c). The remaining groups with highly negative consumption 
regression residuals in each ecosystem model are either low biomass fish or invertebrates, or 
fisheries with extremely low catch. These include rockfish groups in the EBS, flatfish groups and 
salmon fisheries in the AI, and fish larvae, king crabs and the shrimp trawl fishery in the GOA 
(Fig. 33a-c).  
87
 
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
Figure 33a. Regression residuals from the relationship of log consumption and catch per unit area with 
trophic level (TL) in the Eastern Bering Sea. Species groups or fisheries with the largest 
residuals (most extreme consumption or catch at a given TL) are labeled.  In the axis label, 
lm(logEBS~EBS.TL) means the fitted values from the linear regression model where log biomass 
is predicted by trophic level. 
88
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
Figure 33b. 	Regression residuals from the relationship of log consumption and catch per unit area with 
trophic level (TL) in the Aleutian Islands. Species groups or fisheries with the largest residuals 
(most extreme consumption or catch at a given TL) are labeled. In the axis label, 
lm(logAI~AI.TL) means the fitted values from the linear regression model where log biomass is 
predicted by trophic level. 
89
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
Figure 33c. Regression residuals from the relationship of log consumption and catch per unit area with 
trophic level (TL) in the Gulf of Alaska. Species groups or fisheries with the largest residuals 
(most extreme consumption or catch at a given TL) are labeled. In the axis label, 
lm(logGOA~GOA.TL) means the fitted values from the linear regression model where log 
biomass is predicted by trophic level. 
To further clarify the relationships between fishery catch and predator consumption in each 
modeled ecosystem, we examine consumption at TL for TL 4 and greater. The AI ecosystem has 
two of the three groups with the highest consumption over TL 4, grenadiers (first), and cod 
(third; Figure 34). GOA arrowtooth have the second highest consumption of any group over TL 
4, and EBS cod rank fourth. The remaining groups in the top ten consumers have considerably 
lower consumption than the top 4. Ranked fifth through tenth are, respectively, AI miscellaneous 
deepwater fish, GOA cod, the EBS pollock trawl fishery, AI porpoises, and EBS and GOA 
grenadiers (Fig. 34). While cod and grenadiers from all three ecosystems appear in the top ten 
consumers above TL 4, some groups have vastly different consumption estimates between 
90
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0
2
4
6
8
10
4 4.5 5 5.5
TL
Consumption (t/km2)
AI
EBS
GOA
grenadiers
arrowtooth
cod
pollock trawl
Misc fish deep
cod
cod
grenadiers porpoises
N. fur seal
arrowtooth
AK skateLg
sculpins
halibut
Kam. fl.
sable
fish
Steller sea lion
Atka trawl
pollock trawl
cod longine halibut longline   
  
 
 
ecosystems. For example, arrowtooth flounder, halibut, and sablefish have much higher 
consumption in the GOA relative to the other ecosystems, while Alaska skates, fur seals and 
large sculpins have much higher consumption in the EBS. In the AI, Steller sea lions and 
Kamchatka flounder have relatively high consumption as well as the porpoises and misc. deep 
fish mentioned above. In terms of fisheries, the EBS pollock trawl fishery has a much higher 
catch rate than its counterpart in the AI or GOA, and is the fishery with the overall highest 
consumption rate in any ecosystem. In the AI, the pollock and Atka mackerel trawl fisheries 
have consumption of a magnitude slightly lower that estimated for AI sea lions, but higher than 
for other fisheries in that ecosystem. Above TL 5, the EBS cod longline fishery and the GOA 
halibut longline fisheries have the highest consumption rates of the few groups (mostly fisheries) 
at that TL (Fig. 34).  
TL 
Figure 34. Total consumption and total catch (t/km2) for species groups and fisheries in the Aleutian Islands 
(diamonds), Eastern Bering Sea (squares), and Gulf of Alaska (triangles) ecosystem models, 
trophic levels (TL) 4 through 5.5. 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
4 4.5 5 5.5 
Consumption (t/km2) 
AI 
EBS 
GOA 
grenadiers 
arrowtooth 
cod 
pollock trawl 
Misc fish deep 
cod 
cod 
grenadiers porpoises 
N. fur seal 
arrowtooth 
AK skate Lg 
sculpins 
halibut 
Kam. fl. 
sable 
fish 
Steller sea lion 
Atka trawl 
pollock trawl 
cod longine halibut longline 
91
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
     
 
 
Once again, we applied regression analysis to addresses more general structural differences 
between ecosystems to determine whether there is a fundamentally different consumption at a 
given TL for these predators and fisheries above TL 4. Similar to the biomass relationships, the 
relationship between (log) consumption per area and TL appears similar for the GOA and AI 
models, while the EBS model relationship has a steeper negative slope (Fig. 35). The EBS 
consumption for TL>4 regression is statistically significant (p<0.001) with an R2 fit of 0.19. The 
AI and GOA regressions were statistically significant only at the p<0.10 level, with very low R2 
fits of 0.04 to 0.06. Visually, the difference in regression suggests a potential difference in 
structure between the EBS and the other two ecosystems in terms of predator and fishery 
consumption; however, the poor fits for the AI and GOA relationships make it difficult to assert 
that there is a statistical difference between these regressions. Nevertheless, it is instructive to 
compare outliers for these regressions as above to determine which might be influential 
Figure 35.	 Relationship of log consumption (t/km2) with trophic level (TL) for apex predators and fisheries 
(TL 4 and greater) in the Eastern Bering Sea, Gulf of Alaska and Aleutian Islands. 
consumers above TL 4 in the three ecosystems.  
92
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
   
 
 
Residuals from the highly significant EBS regression of consumption at TL>4 include both 
fisheries and important predators. The pollock trawl fishery has the highest residual, indicating 
the greatest consumption for its trophic level (Fig. 36a). Next highest (and at the same TL) is the 
Northern fur seal. Pacific cod, the cod longline fishery, and grenadiers have the remaining 
highest residuals, although there are few groups for comparison at the TL of the cod longline 
fishery (Fig. 36a). The highest positive residuals in the less significant AI and GOA regressions 
follow the pattern established in Figure 34, with grenadiers, cod, porpoises and misc. deep fish 
highest in the AI (Fig. 36b), and arrowtooth, halibut, cod and grenadiers in the GOA (Fig. 36c). 
The notable difference between the EBS and the other ecosystems is the presence of fisheries in 
its high consuming groups above TL 4, where the GOA and AI have only groundfish predators.  
All three ecosystems have a fishery among the lowest consuming groups at a given TL: the 
indigenous and subsistence fishery, which takes marine mammals but in small amounts (Figs. 36 
a-c). In addition, the GOA and AI have crab pot and salmon fisheries, respectively, among low 
consuming groups. Additional low consuming groups in each system reflect some of the patterns 
from lower TL, such as juvenile flatfish in the AI and rockfish in the EBS. Perhaps the most 
surprising pattern in the low consuming groups is the presence of transient killer whales among 
the lowest residuals for their TL in both the EBS and the GOA, where they are commonly 
considered important apex predators. Transient killer whales have consumption more in line with 
other groups at their trophic level in the AI. However, it is difficult to draw many conclusions 
from these comparisons of the highest trophic levels where there are relatively few groups in any 
ecosystem.  
93
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Figure 36a. 	 Regression residuals from the relationship of log consumption and catch per unit area with 
trophic level (TL) for apex predators and fisheries (TL 4 and up) in the Eastern Bering Sea. 
Species groups or fisheries with the largest residuals (most extreme consumption or catch at a 
given TL) are labeled. In the axis label, lm(logEBS~EBS.TL) means the fitted values from the 
linear regression model where log biomass is predicted by trophic level. 
94
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
Figure 36b.  	Regression residuals from the relationship of log consumption and catch per unit area with 
trophic level (TL) for apex predators and fisheries (TL 4 and up) in the Aleutian Islands. Species 
groups or fisheries with the largest residuals (most extreme consumption or catch at a given TL) 
are labeled. In the axis label, lm(logAI~AI.TL) means the fitted values from the linear regression 
model where log biomass is predicted by trophic level. 
95
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 36c.  	Regression residuals from the relationship of log consumption and catch per unit area with 
trophic level (TL) for apex predators and fisheries (TL 4 and up) in the Aleutian Islands. Species 
groups or fisheries with the largest residuals (most extreme consumption or catch at a given TL) 
are labeled. In the axis label, lm(logGOA~GOA.TL) means the fitted values from the linear 
regression model where log biomass is predicted by trophic level. 
3.3.3.3	 Fishery “footprint” comparisons  
The comparison of consumption at a given TL presented above in Section 3.3.3.2 provides 
some insight into the interaction of fisheries and predators within each ecosystem on a group-by­
group basis. In this section, we present a more integrated analysis of the effects of fishing and 
predation within each ecosystem by examining the sources and fates of the production of each 
group. By accounting for where the production of each species group ultimately exits the system, 
we can examine the “footprint” of a given predator or fishery—how much production of each 
96
 
 
 
   
  
    
   
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
group throughout the food web is used by the given consumer? In general, there are three 
ultimate fates, or sinks, for the production of a group: it can be consumed by a predator, be 
removed by a fishery, or it can go to detritus (we simplify the analysis by disregarding 
respiration and growth for each population). In this analysis, we trace production throughout the 
food web to its apex predator. Therefore, when a prey species is consumed by a predator, and 
that predator is then caught by a fishery, the fishery has ultimately removed both the biomass of 
predator caught and that proportion of prey production required to support it. In the first analysis 
discussed below, we aggregate predator and fishery types to compare the ultimate fate of the 
production of each group between ecosystems, and provide an overview of the extent to which 
mammal, fish, and fishery predators are dominant systemwide energy sinks. The analysis 
discussed second explores the influence of selected individual dominant predators and fisheries 
in each ecosystem by including both the direct removals by a predator or fishery (the prey 
consumed or catch removed) and the indirect removals in terms of the production of other 
species groups required to support that prey or catch.  
In Figure 37, we show an estimate of the proportion of total production of each species group 
removed by predators (grouped into marine mammals, birds, fish, forage species, benthos, and 
planktonic predators) and fisheries (grouped by management agency into the Federal groundfish 
fisheries, the halibut fishery, the Alaska salmon, crab, and herring fisheries, and the subsistence 
fishery). The leftmost white portions of each species bar represent the amount of energy exiting 
the system as detritus, meaning the production was neither consumed by predators nor caught in 
fisheries. The common assumption of 80% utilization of data-poor species in each ecosystem is 
reflected in the groups where this white bar reaches exactly 0.2. Conversely, the rightmost darker 
portions of bars represent the production exiting as a result of fishing, either through direct catch 
or consumption by a predator which was ultimately caught. In between, lighter colors represent 
the proportion of energy for each group exiting the system via apex predator consumption. 
Comparing energy sinks by species in Figures 37 a-c, each ecosystem is characterized by 
some similar consumption patterns observed in previous analyses combined with newly apparent 
fishery patterns. For example, benthic energy sinks (pink) are more prevalent in the EBS (Fig. 
37a) than in either of the other ecosystems, while pelagic forage energy sinks (pale blue) are 
most apparent in the AI (Fig. 37b), and fish predators (pale orange) are the predominant non-
fishery energy sink in the GOA (Fig. 37c). Fishery influences also vary by system: the combined 
dark bars representing fishing sinks appear to occupy the most area in the AI plot relative to the 
other two ecosystems, mostly as a result of Federal groundfish fisheries (dark red bars, Figure 
37b). The halibut longline fishery is a large energy sink for many species only in the GOA (dark 
blue bars, Figure 37c). Finally, a small amount of the energy of many low TL species in the EBS 
exits the system as a result of the AK state managed salmon and crab fisheries (bright red bars, 
Figure 37a). These results suggest that fisheries act as significant energy sinks throughout the 
food web in all three systems, but that the largest withdrawl of energy proportionally was in the 
AI during the early 1990s. In each ecosystem, fisheries “reach” all the way to primary producers, 
with an estimated range of 3.5% (GOA) to 16% (AI) of phytoplankton group production exiting 
the system via fisheries. 
Following pages:  
Figure 37 a-c. Ecosystem wide footprint for each species group in the Eastern Bering Sea (a), Aleutian Islands 
(b), and Gulf of Alaska (c).  
97
 
 
 
 
 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
Transient Killers 
Sperm and Beaked
Resident Killers 
Porpoises
Belugas
Gray Whales
Humpbacks
Fin Whales 
Sei w hales 
Right w hales
Minke w hales 
Bow head Whales 
EBS 
energy sinks 
by species 
Detritus 
MarineMammals 
Sea Otters 
Walrus Bd Seals 
N. Fur Seal_Juv
N. Fur Seal 
Steller Sea Lion_Juv 
Steller Sea Lion 
Resident seals 
Birds 
Fish 
Forage 
Wintering seals
Shearw ater 
M urres 
Kittiw akes 
Benthos 
Plankton 
Auklets 
P uffins 
Fulmars 
Groundfish fishery 
Storm Petrels 
Cormorants Halibut fishery 
Gulls 
Albatross Jaeger
Sleeper shark
W. Pollock_Juv
W. Pollock 
P. Cod_Juv
P. Cod 
Sal-herr-crab fishery 
Subsist fishery 
Herring_Juv
Herring
Arrow tooth_Juv 
Arrow tooth 
Kamchatka fl._Juv 
Kamchatka fl. 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 
Gr. Turbot 
P. Halibut_Juv 
P.  Halibut 
YF. Sole_Juv
YF. Sole 
FH. Sole_Juv
FH. Sole 
N. Roc k s ole_Juv
N. Rock sole 
AK P laice 
Dov er Sole 
Rex Sole 
M isc. Flatfish 
Alaska skate 
Other skates 
Sablefish_Juv 
Sablefish 
E elpouts
Grenadiers 
Misc. fish deep
POP 
Sharpchin Rock
Northern Rock 
Dusky  Roc k
Shortraker Rock 
Rougheye Rock
Shortspine Thorns
Other Sebastes 
Atka mackerel_Juv
Atka mackerel 
Greenlings
Lg. Sculpins
Other sculpins
M isc. fish shallow 
Octopi
Squids
Salmon returning
Salmon outgoing
Bathylagidae
Myctophidae
Capelin
Sandlance 
Eulachon 
Oth. managed forage
Oth. pelagic smelt
Bairdi_Juv
Bairdi 
King Crab_Juv
King Crab
Opilio_Juv
Opilio
Pandalidae 
NP s hrimp
Sea stars 
Brittle stars 
Urchins dollars 
Snails 
Hermit crabs 
M isc. crabs 
Misc. Crustacean 
Benthic Amphipods
Anemones 
Corals 
Hydroids
Urochordata 
Sea Pens 
Sponges
Bivalves 
P olychaetes
M isc. w orms 
Scyphozoid Jellies 
Fish Larvae 
Chaetognaths
Euphausiids
My s ids 
Pelagic Amphipods
Gelatinous filter feeders 
Figure 37a 
Pteropods
Copepods
Pelagic microbes
Benthic microbes 
Macroalgae
Lg Phytoplankton
Sm Phytoplankton 
98
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
Transient Killers 
Sperm and Beaked
Resident Killers 
Por pois es 
Humpbac ks
Fin Whales 
Sei w hales 
AI 
energy sinks 
by species 
Right w hales 
Minke w hales 
Sea Otters 
N. Fur Seal_Juv 
N. Fur Seal 
Steller Sea Lion_Juv 
Steller Sea Lion 
Resident seals 
Detritus 
MarineMammals 
Birds 
Shearw ater 
Murr es Fish 
Kittiw akes 
Auklets Forage 
P uffins 
Fulmars Benthos 
Storm Petrels 
Cormorants Plankton 
Gulls 
Albatross Jaeger
Sleeper shark
Salmon shark 
Dogfish
W. Pollock_Juv 
W. Pollock 
P.  Cod_Juv 
P. Cod 
Groundfish fishery 
Halibut fishery 
Sal-herr-crab fishery 
Subsist fishery 
Herring_Juv
Herring
Arrow tooth_Juv 
Arrow tooth 
Kamchatka fl._Juv 
Kamchatka fl. 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 
Gr. Turbot 
P. Halibut_Juv 
P. Halibut 
YF. Sole_Juv 
YF . Sole 
FH. Sole_Juv 
FH. Sole 
N. Roc k s ole 
S. R ock sole 
AK P laice 
Dover Sole 
Rex  Sole 
Mis c . Flatf is h 
Alaska skate 
Other skates 
Sablefish_Juv 
Sablefish 
Eelpouts
Grenadiers 
M isc. fish deep
POP 
Sharpchin Rock
Norther n Roc k 
Dus ky Roc k
Shortraker Rock 
Rougheye Rock
Shortspine Thorns
Other Sebastes 
Atka mackerel_Juv 
Atka m ackerel 
Greenlings
Lg. Sculpins
Other sculpins
M isc. fish shallow 
Octopi
Squids 
Salm on returning
Salmon outgoing
Bathylagidae
Myctophidae
Capelin 
Sandlance 
Eulac hon 
Oth. managed forage
Oth. pelagic smelt
Bairdi 
King Crab
M isc. crabs 
Pandalidae 
NP s hrimp
Sea stars 
Brittle stars 
Urchins dollars 
Snails 
Hermit c rabs 
M isc. C rustacean 
Benthic Amphipods
Anemones 
Corals 
Hydroids
Urochordata 
Sea Pens 
Sponges
Bivalves 
P olychaetes
M isc. w orm s 
Scyphozoid Jellies
Fish Larvae 
Chaetognaths
Euphausiids
Mys ids 
Pelagic Amphipods
Gelatinous filter 
Pteropods
Copepods
P elagic m icrobes
Benthic microbes 
Figure 37b 
Mac r oalgae 
Lg Phytoplankton 
Sm Phytoplankton 
99
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1 
Transient Killers
 
Sperm and Beaked
 GOA 
Resident Killers
 
Por pois es
 energy sinks 
Gray Whales
Humpbac ks
 by species Fin Whales
 
Sei w hales
 
Right w hales
Minke w hales
 Detritus 
Sea Otters 
MarineMammals N. Fur Seal_Juv 
N. Fur Seal
 
Steller Sea Lion_Juv
 Birds 
Steller Sea Lion 
Resident seals Fish 
Shearw ater
 
M urres
 Forage 
Kittiw akes
 
Auklets
 Benthos 
P uffi ns
 
Fulmars
 Plankton 
Storm Petrels
 
Cormorants
 Groundfish fishery 
Gulls
 
Albatross Jaeger
 Halibut fishery Sleeper shark
Salmon shark Sal-herr-crab fishery 
Dogfish
W. Pollock_Juv Subsist fishery W. Pollock 
P. Cod_Juv 
P. Cod
 
Herring_Juv
Herring
Arrow tooth_Juv
 
Arrow tooth
 
P . Halibut_Juv 
P. Halibut
 
YF. Sole
 
FH. Sole_Juv
 
FH. Sole
 
N. Roc k s ole 
S. R ock sole
 
AK P laice
 
Dov er Sole
 
Rex  Sole
 
Mis c . Flatf is h
 
Other skates
 
Longnose skate
Big skate
Sablefish_Juv
 
Sablefish
 
Eelpouts
Grenadiers
 
M isc. fish deep
POP_Juv
 
POP
 
Sharpchin Rock
Northern Rock
 
D usky R ock
Shortraker Rock
 
Rougheye Rock
Shortspine Thorns_Juv
Shortspine Thorns
Other Sebastes
 
Atka mackerel_Juv
 
Atka mackerel
 
Greenlings
Lg. Sculpins
Other sculpins
M isc. fish shallow
 
Octopi
Squids
Salm on returning
Salmon outgoing
Bathylagidae
Myctophidae
Capelin
 
Sandlance
 
Eulac hon
 
Oth. managed forage
Oth. pelagic smelt
Bairdi
 
King Crab
Mis c . c r abs
 
Pandalidae
 
NP shrimp
Sea stars
 
Brittle stars
 
U rchins dollars
 
Snails
 
Hermit c rabs
 
Misc. Crustacean
 
Benthic Amphipods
Anemones
 
Corals
 
Hydroids
Urochordata
 
Sea Pens
 
Sponges
Bivalves
 
Polychaetes
M isc. w orm s 
Scyphozoid Jellies
Fish Larvae
 
Chaetognaths
Euphausiids
M ysids
 
Pelagic Amphipods
Gelatinous filter feeders
 
Pteropods
Copepods
Pelagic microbes
Benthic microbes
 
Mac r oalgae
Lg Phytoplankton
Sm Phytoplankton
 
Figure 37c 
100
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
Next, we examine the footprint of a specific fishery or predator, which is measured as the 
amount of production of each group in the food web required to support that fishery or predator. 
In the context of the plots presented above, the footprint is the amount of each group’s 
production exiting the system through the fishery or predator. Here, we compare the footprints of 
a major predator and a major fishery in each ecosystem: northern fur seals and the pollock 
fishery in the EBS, cod and the Atka mackerel fishery in the AI, and arrowtooth flounder and the 
halibut fishery in the GOA.  
In the EBS, both northern fur seals and the pollock trawl fishery were identified as high 
consumers for their TL in Figure 36a above. Therefore, we might expect that these consumers 
are taking considerable portions of the production of other groups in the ecosystem, but they 
affect different groups. Fur seals are estimated to remove over 15% of Atka mackerel production 
from the EBS, over 20% of the production of several flatfish groups and capelin, and in excess of 
40% of the production of several juvenile fish groups including herring, sablefish, and salmon 
(Fig. 38). Note that all of these juvenile fish groups have unknown biomass, so the assumption 
that 80% of their production is consumed within the system contributes to uncertainty in this 
result; if less than 80% of their production is actually consumed within the system, then 
proportionally less of that production would be removed by fur seals. Nevertheless, even this 
uncertain result indicates that fur seals are major sinks for juvenile herring, sablefish, and salmon 
production. 
Unlike the fur seal, the EBS pollock fishery removes a high percentage of production for a 
single target species, which amounts to 35% of adult pollock production from the EBS 
ecosystem. Despite the extremely “clean” nature of the pollock fishery which has a catch of over 
95% pure pollock, it is clear that the fishery relies on the production of many more species than 
just pollock in removing this catch from the ecosystem. Nearly 20% of the production of forage 
species such as bathylagids and pandalid shrimp are required to support the pollock fishery 
catch, and more than 10% of the production of herring, arrowtooth flounder, Greenland turbot, 
myctophids, and most pelagic zooplankton (including euphausiids, mysids, and copepods) are 
required to support the EBS pollock fishery (Fig. 38). For most zooplankton and phytoplankton 
groups, the pollock fishery requires more than double the production removed by fur seals to 
support its catch. 
101
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
production proportion required 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
N. Fur Seal
Pollock Trawl
Transient Killers 
Sperm and Beaked
Resident Killers 
Porpoises
Belugas
Gray Whales
Humpbacks
Fin Whales 
Sei whales 
Right whales
Minke whales 
Bowhead Whales 
Sea Otters 
Walrus Bd Seals 
Fur Seal_Juv N. 
Fur Seal N. 
Steller Sea Lion_Juv 
Steller Sea Lion 
Resident seals 
Wintering seals
Shearwater 
Murres 
Kittiwakes 
Auklets 
Puffins 
Fulmars 
Storm Petrels 
Cormorants 
Gulls 
Albatross Jaeger
Sleeper shark
Pollock_Juv W. 
Pollock W. 
 Cod_Juv P.
 Cod P.
Herring_Juv
Herring
Arrowtooth_Juv 
Arrowtooth 
Kamchatka fl._Juv 
Kamchatka fl. 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 
Gr. Turbot 
 Halibut_Juv P.
 Halibut P.
YF. Sole_Juv 
YF. Sole 
FH. Sole_Juv 
FH. Sole 
Rock soN. le_Juv 
Rock soN. le 
AK Plaice 
Dover So le 
Rex Sole 
Misc. Flatfish 
Alaska skate 
Other skates 
Sablefish_Juv 
Sablefish 
Eelpouts
Grenadiers 
Misc. fish deep
POP 
Sharpchin Rock
Northern Rock 
Dusky Rock
Shortraker Rock 
Rougheye Rock
Shortspine Thorns
Other Sebastes 
Atka mackerel_Juv 
Atka mackerel 
Greenlings
Lg. Sculpins
Other sculpins
Misc. fish shallow 
Octopi
Squids
Salmon returning
Salmon outgoing
Bathylagidae
Myctophidae
Capelin
Sandlance 
Eulachon 
Oth. managed forage
Oth. pelagic smelt
Bairdi_Juv 
Bairdi 
King Crab_Juv
King Crab
Opilio_Juv
Opilio
Pandalidae 
NP shrimp
Sea stars 
Brittle stars 
Urchins dollars 
Snails 
Hermit crabs 
Misc. crabs 
Misc. Crustacean 
Benthic Amphipods
Anemones 
Corals 
Hydroids
Urochordata 
Sea Pens 
Sponges
Bivalves 
Polychaetes
Misc. worms 
Scyphozoid Jellies
Fish Larvae 
Chaetognaths
Euphausiids
Mysids
Pelagic Amphipods
Gelatinous filter feeders 
Pteropods
Copepods
Pelagic microbes
Benthic microbes 
Macroalgae
Lg Phytoplankton
Sm Phytoplankton
Outside Production 
Discards 
Offal 
Pelagic Detritus
Benth ic Detritus 
Figure 38. Eastern Bering Sea p redator and fishery footprints for northern fur seal (blue) and the pollock fishery (dark red). The footprint is the 
production of each species on the x-axis required to support a given predator or fishery in the ecosystem.  
102

 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
In the AI, both Pacific cod and the Atka mackerel trawl fishery were identified as important 
consumers above TL 4, although only cod had especially high consumption relative to other 
species at its trophic level (Fig. 36b). As predators with high consumption and a diverse diet, cod 
remove substantial proportions of the production of several species in the AI ecosystem: 20% of 
Tanner crab, eelpout, and other sculpin production, 30% of greenling production, and up to 40% 
of rex sole, juvenile sablefish, and juvenile arrowtooth production (Fig. 39). As described above 
for EBS fur seals, AI cod’s removal of juvenile fish production is estimated based on the 
assumption that 80% of that production is used within the ecosystem; if the actual amount of 
juvenile fish production used is higher or lower, than the removal by cod will be proportionally 
higher or lower. The footprint of AI cod affects many species in the ecosystem from fish through 
benthic invertebrates; in particular crabs, shrimp, sea stars, and benthic worms are large 
taxonomic aggregates which have 10-15% of annual production removed by cod alone. 
The AI Atka mackerel fishery removes more than 20% of the production of its target species. 
This fishery also retains incidentally caught rockfish, resulting in high levels of production 
removal for several species: 18% for northern, 25% for rougheye, and 38% for dusky (Fig. 39). 
The highest removals attributed to the AI Atka mackerel fishery are for flatfish (55% for Alaska 
plaice and 73% for yellowfin sole), which are low biomass groups in this ecosystem. In contrast 
with the comparison above of the EBS pollock fishery and EBS fur seals, the AI Atka mackerel 
fishery removes a similar proportion of production from the lowest TL zooplankton as AI Pacific 
cod removes; approximately 5%. The amount of primary production required to support the Atka 
mackerel fishery and Pacific cod are also nearly identical, 3-4% for each phytoplankton group.  
103
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
0
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0.5 
0.6 
0.7 producti on proporti on requi re d 
P. Cod
Atka Trawl
Transient Killers 
Sperm and Beaked
Resident Killers 
Porpoises
Humpbacks
Fin Whales 
Sei whales 
Right whales
Minke whales 
Sea Otters 
Fur Seal_Juv N. 
Fur Seal N. 
Steller Sea Lion_Juv 
Steller Sea Lion 
Resident seals 
Shearwater 
Murres 
Kittiwakes 
Auklets 
Puffins 
Fulmars 
Storm Petrels 
Cormorants 
Gulls 
Albatross Jaeger
Sleeper shark
Salmon shark 
Dogfish
Pollock_Juv W. 
Pollock W. 
Cod_Juv P. 
Cod P. 
Herring_Juv
Herring
Arrowtooth_Juv 
Arrowtooth 
Kamchatka fl._Juv 
Kamchatka fl. 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 
Gr. Turbot 
Halibut_Juv P. 
Halibut P. 
YF. Sole_Juv 
YF. Sole 
FH. Sole_Juv 
FH. Sole 
Rock sole N. 
Rock sole S. 
AK Plaice 
Dover Sole 
Rex Sole 
Misc. Flatfish 
Alaska skate 
Other skates 
Sablefish_Juv 
Sablefish 
Eelpouts
Grenadiers 
Misc. fish deep
POP 
Sharpchin Rock
Northern Rock 
Dusky Rock
Shortraker Rock 
Rougheye Rock
Shortspine Thorns
Other Sebastes 
Atka mackerel_Juv 
Atka mackerel 
Greenlings
Lg. Sculpins
Other sculpins
Misc. fish shallow 
Octopi
Squids
Salmon returning
Salmon outgoing
Bathylagidae
Myctophidae
Capelin
Sandlance 
Eulachon 
Oth. managed forage
Oth. pelagic smelt
Bairdi 
King Crab
Misc. crabs 
Pandalidae 
NP shrimp
Sea stars 
Brittle stars 
Urchins dollars 
Snails 
Hermit crabs 
Misc. Crustacean 
Benthic Amphipods
Anemones 
Corals 
Hydroids
Urochordata 
Sea Pens 
Sponges
Bivalves 
Polychaetes
Misc. worms 
Scyphozoid Jellies
Fish Larvae 
Chaetognaths
Euphausiids
Mysids
Pelagic Amphipods
Gelatinous filter 
Pteropods
Copepods
Pelagic microbes
Benthic microbes 
Macroalgae
Lg Phytoplankton
Sm Phytoplankton 
Figure 39. Aleutian Islands predator and fishery footprints for Pacific cod (blue) and the Atka mackerel fishery (dark red). The footprint is the 
production of each species on the x-axis required to support a given predator or fishery in the ecosystem.  
104

 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Arrowtooth flounder and the Pacific halibut fishery are important high TL consumers in the 
GOA (see Figs. 34 and 36c). Arrowtooth flounder remove a high proportion of the production of 
many groups in the ecosystem, including about 25% of adult pollock, herring, and Atka mackerel 
production; 30-35% of capelin and eelpout production, and 40-55% of juvenile pollock, herring, 
sablefish, and Atka mackerel production (Fig. 40). In addition, between 10 and 20% of the 
production of other forage fish, shrimp, benthic invertebrates and half the zooplankton groups 
are removed by arrowtooth flounder in this ecosystem. The same caveats mentioned above for 
groups with uncertain biomass (juvenile fish, forage fish, some invertebrates) where we assumed 
80% of production is used within the ecosystem apply here. However, if arrowtooth remove the 
majority of a species production under the current assumptions, that will not change even if the 
absolute amount of production removed changes. Therefore, it is clear that arrowtooth flounder 
require a considerable amount of production in this ecosystem to maintain their high biomass.  
As the highest TL consumer in the GOA, the halibut fishery is estimated to remove 30% of its 
target species’ production, as well as a substantial proportion of the production of other high TL 
consumers, such as sleeper sharks (58%) and dogfish (48%; Fig. 40). In addition, the halibut 
fishery removes 17-34% of skate production from the GOA, depending on the species. Rex sole 
is the next largest production removal at 15%; this is an indirect effect of fishery bycatch because 
rex sole are a primary prey of longnose skates in the GOA. The 10% of pollock and herring 
production removed by the halibut fishery support halibut directly as prey. Most other species in 
the halibut fishery footprint have less than 10% of production removed. Despite removing a 
majority of the production of several high TL predators, the GOA halibut fishery has a smaller 
footprint for all zooplankton and phytoplankton groups than GOA arrowtooth flounder.  
105
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
production proportion required 
0.7 
0.6 
0.5 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0 
Arrowtooth
Halibut Longline
Transient Killers 
Sperm and Beaked
Resident Killers 
Porpoises
Gray Whales
Humpbacks
Fin Whales 
Sei whales 
Right whales
Minke wha les 
Sea Otters 
Fur Seal_Juv N. 
Fur Seal N. 
Steller Sea Lion_Juv 
Steller Sea Lion 
Resident seals 
Shearwater 
Murres 
Kittiwakes 
Auklets 
Puffins 
Fulmars 
Storm Petrels 
Cormorants 
Gulls 
Albatross Jaeger
Sleeper shark
Sa lmon shark 
Dogfish
Pollock_Juv W. 
Pollock W. 
 Cod_Juv P.
Cod P. 
Herring_Juv
Herring
Arrowtooth_Juv 
Arrowtooth 
Halibut_Juv P. 
 Halibut P.
YF. Sole 
FH. Sole_Juv 
FH. Sole 
Rock sole N. 
 Rock sole S.
AK Plaice 
Dover Sole 
Rex Sole 
Misc. Flatfish 
Other skates 
Longnose skate
Big skate
Sablefish_Juv 
Sablef ish 
Eelpouts
Grenadiers 
Misc. fish deep
POP_Juv 
POP 
Sharpchin Rock
Northern Rock 
Dusky Rock
Shortraker Rock 
Rougheye Rock
Shortspine Thorns_Juv
Shortspine Thorns
Other Sebastes 
Atka mackerel_Juv 
Atka mackerel 
Greenlings
Lg. Sculpins
Other sculpins
Misc. fish shallow 
Octopi
Squids
Salmon return ing
Salmon outgoing
Bathylagidae
Myctophidae
Capelin
Sandlance 
Eulachon 
Oth. managed forage
Oth. pelagic smelt
Bairdi 
King Crab
Misc. crabs 
Pandalidae 
NP shrimp
Sea stars 
Brittle stars 
Urchins dollars 
Snails 
Hermit crabs 
Misc. Crustacean 
Benthic Amphipods
Anemones 
Corals 
Hydroids
Urochordata 
Sea Pens 
Sponges
Bivalves 
Polychaetes
Misc. worms 
Scyphozoid Jellies
Fish Larvae 
Chaetognaths
Euphaus iids 
Mysids
Pelagic Amphipods
Gelatinous filter feeders 
Pteropods
Copepods
Pe lagic m icrobes 
Benthic m icrobes 
Macroalgae
Lg Phytop lankton 
Sm Phytoplankton
Outside Production 
Discards 
Offal 
Pelagic Detritus
Benthic Detritus 
Figure 40. Gulf of Alaska predator and fishery footprints for arrowtooth flounder (blue) and the halibut longline fishery (dark red). The footprint is the 
production of each species on the x-axis required to support a given predator or fishery in the ecosystem.  
106

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Footprints of production required to support fisheries and predators are indicators of both 
potential single species impacts and ecosystem level impacts of individual consumers. 
Furthermore, comparing predator footprints with fishery footprints demonstrates some 
differences in the way these different consumers affect the ecosystem. For the fisheries and 
predators compared, fishery footprints extend across more species and trophic levels than those 
of the predators. In part, this is attributable to incidental catch of species not eaten by the 
predators, such as birds, whales, sponges, and corals. Viewing the production removed by 
fisheries of all ecosystem groups suggests that some fishery bycatch may have substantial 
impacts on nontarget species (e.g., the GOA halibut fishery’s incidental catch of skates and 
sharks). Further comparisons suggest whether the removal of high proportions of certain group’s 
production is more important as a single species consideration or as an ecosystem consideration. 
Comparisons of low TL production required to support fisheries relative to top predators 
suggest different ecosystem impacts of fishing. In the EBS, the pollock fishery is very species 
specific relative fur seals, a predator at the same TL, but the production at the base of the food 
web (zooplankton and phytoplankton) required to support the pollock fishery is much higher 
than that required to support the predator. The AI Atka mackerel fishery requires a similar level 
of base ecosystem production as the dominant predator in that system, Pacific cod. At the other 
end of the spectrum, the GOA halibut fishery removes substantial predator production, but far 
less base ecosystem production than the dominant predator in that system, arrowtooth flounder. 
Of the three fisheries compared, the EBS pollock fishery has the largest impact on low trophic 
level production, while the GOA halibut fishery has the largest impact on high trophic level 
production. The AI Atka mackerel fishery appears to have a similar impact on low TL 
production as cod do in that ecosystem, and a similar range of effects (though on more and 
different species) on mid to high TL production. It seems likely that a fishery removing high 
proportions of primary production compared with natural predators might have different 
ecosystem level impacts through redirection of this basic energy flow than one removing high 
proportions of individual species, but lower proportions of primary production. We suggest that 
analyses of fishery footprints be supplemented with further simulation analyses to determine 
whether a threshold “safe” level of primary and low TL production removed exists which can 
then be used as an indicator for management at the ecosystem level.  
4. Summary and Conclusions 
The detailed food web models we constructed for the EBS, GOA, and AI marine ecosystems 
provide important insights for fishery management on multiple levels. First, the simple 
“accounting exercise” of assembling information for all species in the same units for the same 
time period forces the modeler to reconcile multiple, sometimes conflicting sources of 
information: survey data, food habits data, and production, consumption, and biomass estimates 
which may be based on stock assessment results from multiple agencies. The full accounting of 
biomass, production, consumption, diet composition, and catch information for each species in 
the three food webs was a formidable task, requiring access to data from multiple management 
agencies responsible for different resources (see Appendix A). Because stock assessments are 
conducted independently for different species, and different agencies maintain survey and fishery 
databases collected by diverse methods over different timeframes and for different goals, 
107
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
assembling this information into a consistent format implicitly checks information and 
assumptions for consistency. In the overwhelming majority of cases, information did prove to be 
consistent enough for each species group’s estimated annual production to adequately supply the 
estimated annual catch and consumption by predators. In Ecopath terms, a majority of groups 
“balanced” using unadjusted information from field surveys and other available sources.  
However, the instances where survey or assessment information was not immediately 
compatible within the food web are also instructive. Most inconsistencies could easily be 
attributed to inadequate field sampling; for example sharpchin rockfish (Sebastes zacentrus) 
survey biomass was too low in all three ecosystems to support the relatively small fishery 
catches and predation estimated on this species. Sharpchin rockfish inhabit rocky, steep areas 
which are very difficult to survey by trawl, so the NMFS trawl surveys likely underestimate 
biomass for this group. Inconsistencies of this type indicate where current field sampling efforts 
might be adjusted to improve biomass estimates if this is a priority for management. These 
models also provide a potential method for scaling biomass estimates for groups which are 
caught by surveys, but are not targets of the surveys, such as benthic invertebrates. 
Consumption-based estimates of biomass for these groups produced by the models are generally 
higher than survey-based estimates, suggesting that survey “catchability” for these invertebrates 
is low. The ratio of consumption based biomass to survey biomass can be used as a scaling factor 
to convert survey time series of invertebrate group biomass into time series of biomass consistent 
with the more data-rich upper trophic level components of the models. Finally, as a simple 
accounting procedure, construction of food web models may help reconcile different 
assumptions between single species stock assessments which may have conflicting results at the 
ecosystem level (see Recommendations, below).  
We used these three models and comparisons between them to describe and explore key food 
web relationships and potential fisheries interactions in each ecosystem. The common modeling 
framework, including biomass pool and fishery definitions, resulted in comparable food webs for 
the three ecosystems which showed that they all have the same apex predator—the Pacific 
halibut longline fishery. However, despite the similar methods used to construct the models, the 
data from each system included in the analysis clearly defines differences in food web structure 
which may be important considerations for fishery management in Alaskan ecosystems. The 
initial descriptive results showed that the EBS has a much larger benthic influence in its food 
web than either the GOA or the AI. The groundfish groups “small flats” and yellowfin sole, 
along with crabs and pollock, are dominant in the EBS. Conversely, the AI has the strongest 
pelagic influence in its food web relative to the two other systems. Dominant groundfish in the 
AI occupy the pelagic pathway: Atka mackerel, and Pacific ocean perch (POP). The GOA 
appears balanced between benthic and pelagic pathways, but is notable in having a relatively 
smaller “biomass” of fisheries (catch) relative to the two other systems, and a high biomass of 
fish predators above TL 4, arrowtooth flounder and halibut. These patterns visible in aggregated 
food webs were confirmed in many subsequent analyses of biomass and consumption in each 
ecosystem.  
In addition to broad energy flow descriptions, food web models were shown to provide both 
single species level and ecosystem level indicators and statistics. Single species indicators for 
walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) in each ecosystem showed contrasts in mortality 
sources for this species. While fisheries for pollock in the three ecosystems had similar catch 
characteristics, during the early 1990s, AI pollock experienced more fishing mortality than 
108
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
predation mortality, unlike in the other two ecosystems. The key difference between the EBS and 
GOA is that the dominant pollock predation mortality came from different sources. In the EBS, 
pollock cannibalism is the dominant source of pollock mortality. In the GOA food web model, 
the overwhelming majority of explained pollock mortality is from predation by arrowtooth 
flounder, cod, and halibut, rather than pollock cannibalism or fishing. These results suggest 
different potential impacts of fishery management for pollock in each ecosystem; first, that 
fishery managers had control over the dominant source of AI pollock mortality during the early 
1990s. In the EBS, a potentially complex interaction between fishing mortality on adult pollock 
and its affects on pollock cannibalism puts pollock mortality less under fishery management 
control. The dominance of predation mortality on GOA pollock suggests that reducing fishing 
mortality may have little impact on their population trajectory, contrary to conventional fishing 
theory. However, it also suggests that increased fishing mortality might have a greater than 
expected effect if the population collapses under the combined effects of high predation 
mortality and increased fishing mortality. 
With respect to ecosystem indicators, we first presented an example where single species 
indicators suggest differences in ecosystem structure. We found that a commercially important 
predator, Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus), has relatively more fishing mortality than 
predation mortality in all three ecosystems. This suggests that changing fishing mortality is likely 
to affect cod population trajectories; therefore, we may ask what effects changes in cod mortality 
might cause in each ecosystem. Our results suggest that the regional level of management 
applied to Pacific cod should be modified to account for differences between the EBS and AI 
ecosystems. At present, cod are studied and assessed separately between the GOA and BSAI 
areas, but with similar management objectives. The impacts of cod predation are demonstrably 
different between the EBS, GOA, and AI ecosystems, with perhaps the largest contrast between 
the EBS and AI, where they are currently assessed and managed identically. The impacts of 
changing cod survival (and by extension, fishing mortality) differ by ecosystem as well, with the 
impacts felt most strongly and with highest certainty in the AI ecosystem according to this 
analysis. Therefore, it seems that the cod fishery in the AI should be managed separately from 
that in the EBS to ensure that any potential ecosystem effects of changing fishing mortality 
might be monitored at the appropriate scale.  
A second set of ecosystem indicators derived from the food web models demonstrated 
differences in the consumption of key forage species between the three food webs, suggesting 
differences between ecosystems in energy flow supporting the predator species, including 
commercially fished groundfish. In the EBS, pollock, the primary forage fish, is also a primary 
commercially fish as an adult. Therefore, in the EBS, the sustainability of the pollock fishery as 
well as a large proportion of predator consumption depends on continued juvenile pollock 
production. Because pollock are both an important commercial species and an important forage 
species in the EBS, we may have a unique opportunity to study the ecosystem dynamics 
surrounding fluctuating forage fish availability there because pollock recruitment is closely 
monitored for stock assessment purposes. In the GOA and AI the primary forage fish, capelin 
and myctophids, are both given protected status by the NPFMC forage fish FMP amendment, 
which prohibits directed fishing for these species. While this regulation was designed to 
minimize any potentially negative direct effects of fishing on forage species in Alaska, there is 
also little information available to study the fluctuations in forage resources in these systems 
precisely because they are non-commercial species. Although similar form a management 
standpoint, the primary forage fish consumed in the AI and the GOA are different from a 
109
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
biological/physical standpoint. Capelin are primarily a coastal, continental shelf species, while 
myctophids are an oceanic, deepwater family of forage fish. This suggests that different climatic 
and oceanographic factors would affect production for the forage base in each ecosystem. 
Therefore, different climate and physical indicators might be appropriate signals of changing 
forage production in the AI as opposed to the GOA. This extends to all three ecosystems: 
consumption patterns confirm that the EBS is more self-contained shelf oriented ecosystem with 
equal benthic and pelagic energy inputs, with little oceanic influence. In contrast, the AI is 
mostly open ocean-influenced. Ecosystem boundaries may be more difficult to discern in an 
open, oceanic food web from an energetic perspective. The GOA food web seems intermediate, 
with an oceanic influence but also localized benthic and coastal pelagic forage base.  
Finally, we present trophodynamic comparisons of biomass, predator consumption and 
fisheries catch, and the impacts of certain consumers on each ecosystem. Despite similar model 
structure and common assumptions for data-poor groups across ecosystems, clear differences in 
biomass and consumption at trophic level were apparent between the EBS, GOA, and AI. 
Biomass comparisons characterize the AI as a classic biomass “pyramid” with the highest 
densities of pelagic zooplankton in any system supporting extremely high densities of pelagic 
forage fish (myctophids) and high densities of commercial forage fish (Atka mackerel) and 
deepwater predators (grenadiers). In contrast, the EBS is characterized by biomass distribution as 
a pollock- and benthic-dominated ecosystem, with extremely high bivalve density and with 
pollock density similar to that estimated for large zooplankton groups in the EBS. The GOA 
biomass distribution departs from the classic pyramid where few predators subsist on many prey; 
here the analysis indicates a predator-dominated ecosystem, with far higher densities of 
arrowtooth flounder and halibut in proportion to the forage base than in either of the other food 
webs. 
Consumption comparisons by trophic level confirmed these patterns but allowed evaluation of 
fishery catch on an equal footing with predator consumption, diversifying the suite of ecosystem 
indicators. In particular, this analysis confirmed that EBS pollock and GOA arrowtooth flounder 
are influential single species in each of these ecosystems in terms of consumption, standing out 
even in the context of whole ecosystem comparisons where consumption by high turnover 
groups (microbes and zooplankton) would be expected to swamp signals from higher trophic 
levels. In comparisons of consumption for high trophic level (TL>4) predators and fisheries, cod 
and grenadiers were influential consumers in all three ecosystems. However, arrowtooth 
flounder, halibut, and sablefish have much higher consumption in the GOA relative to the other 
ecosystems, while Alaska skates, fur seals and large sculpins have much higher consumption in 
the EBS. In the AI, Steller sea lions and Kamchatka flounder have relatively high consumption 
as well as porpoises and misc. deep fish. The EBS pollock trawl fishery is the fishery with the 
overall highest consumption rate in any ecosystem, and has the second highest consumption rate 
for groups over TL 4 in the EBS ecosystem (cod is first). The consumption comparisons showed 
that the EBS is the only ecosystem with fisheries among its most influential high TL consumers, 
although this does not necessarily indicate that fisheries are not influential in the other 
ecosystems, simply that predator consumption is higher in the AI and GOA.  
Direct comparisons of the production required to support each ecosystem group (including 
fisheries) demonstrated contrasting fishery influence in the food web between the ecosystems. 
Fishery energy sinks appeared most prevalent in the AI relative to the other two ecosystems, 
mostly from NMFS managed groundfish fisheries which removed production at higher rates 
110
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
during the early 1990s than they do at present. The halibut longline fishery managed by IPHC is 
a large energy sink for many species only in the GOA. A small amount of the energy of many 
low TL species in the EBS exits the system as a result of the AK state managed salmon and crab 
fisheries. These results suggest that fisheries act as significant energy sinks throughout the food 
web in all three systems, but that the largest withdrawal of energy proportionally was in the AI 
during the early 1990s. In each ecosystem, fisheries “reach” all the way to primary producers, 
with an estimated range of 3.5% (GOA) to 16% (AI) of phytoplankton group production exiting 
the system via fisheries. 
When directly compared with influential predators in each ecosystems, influential fisheries 
had distinctly different footprints in terms of production required to support them. Fishery 
footprints extend across more species and trophic levels than those of the predators due to 
incidental catch of species not eaten by the predators, such as birds, whales, sponges, and corals. 
Some fishery bycatch may have substantial impacts on nontarget species (e.g., the GOA halibut 
fishery’s incidental catch of skates and sharks). Of the three fisheries compared, the EBS pollock 
fishery has the largest impact on low trophic level production, while the GOA halibut fishery has 
the largest impact on high trophic level production. The AI Atka mackerel fishery appears to 
have a similar impact on low TL production as cod do in that ecosystem, and a similar range of 
effects (though on more and different species) on mid- to high-TL production. We suggest that a 
fishery removing high proportions of primary production compared with natural predators might 
have ecosystem level impacts through redirection of this basic energy flow, and that management 
should consider these ecosystem effects separately from those produced by fisheries removing 
high proportions of individual species, but lower proportions of primary production. The next 
step is to determine whether there is a threshold effect of redirecting low TL energy flow through 
fishery removals which can be translated into an indicator for fishery management.  
All of our results are based on the best available scientific data and the detailed modeling 
methods presented here, but in complex ecosystems where many processes and components 
remain poorly known, considerable uncertainty remains. We have incorporated uncertainty in 
our estimates using the Sense routines, which suggest which influential species groups in each 
ecosystem are also the most data poor; in general these are forage species. These differences in 
data quality ultimately affect model-based prediction. While it is straightforward to demonstrate 
the sensitivity of other species in the ecosystem to each of these influential forage groups using a 
simulation analysis, the uncertainty in predictions for AI myctophids and GOA capelin are much 
higher than for EBS juvenile pollock. More generally, uncertainty appears higher in the AI and 
GOA analyses relative to the EBS analyses, due to a combination of data inequities and 
structural differences between ecosystems.  
5. Recommendations 
The models presented here for the EBS, AI, and GOA represent a substantial step forward in 
ecosystem modeling efforts for Alaskan systems to date. We recommend continued research to 
improve these modeling efforts and to incorporate them within fishery management in Alaska. 
Specifically, we recommend continued support for food habits sampling and continued 
improvement in data from multiple sources to make integration within future models and 
analyses more streamlined. Overall, we suggest updating food web models on a 5 year basis to 
111
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
evaluate changes in the food web from field data. Further specific recommendations are as 
follows: 
1. Use alternative models to evaluate ecosystem roles for living substrates; trophic models 
are not appropriate. Corals, sponges, sea whips and sea pens, and other benthic structural 
organisms are potentially important ecosystem components where biomass is not well estimated 
by top down balance using EE=0.80 because they are not major prey of groundfish. Even trawl 
surveys are likely to produce severe underestimates of density for these groups as they are 
designed to catch fish, not benthic structure forming invertebrates. We again strongly caution 
that biomass estimates for these groups produced in these models should not be considered 
representative for analyses outside this narrow trophic context. Furthermore, the importance of 
these species to habitat quality cannot be evaluated within the food web modeling context. We in 
no way intend to suggest that these species are not important, rather, that they be considered 
using alternative analyses to those presented here. 
2. Use these food web models alongside single species models for target species as a basic 
consistency check, because single species models are implemented together in the real world. 
For example, there are differences between the models in terms of data sources for Pacific cod. 
In the EBS, cod biomass based on the survey alone was inadequate to balance this group, so the 
cod stock assessment estimated biomass was substituted. In the GOA and AI models, survey 
biomass estimates for cod were used. Biomass estimates from the stock assessment are generally 
higher than survey estimates in all systems: in the GOA the difference is by a factor of 2. 
Furthermore, the GOA would likely not support a cod biomass as high as the assessment 
indicates as this would increase predation pressure on the already unbalanced pollock, which is 
not problem in the EBS. It may be useful to systematically include assessment biomass in 
balances and compare that to the survey biomass to see which are supported in all the models. 
3. Address changing baselines in time and space: Climate and biological regime shifts likely 
affect food webs, so changes in feeding habits should be monitored both theoretically with 
dynamic ecosystem modeling, and by incorporating new food habits information as it becomes 
available. Updating these models is only a partial solution to the problem of ecosystem shifts; 
historically we have focused most sampling effort on groundfish, with less effort on other 
species demonstrated to be influential here. In the future, more balanced sampling across 
ecosystem components will help us identify when and if food webs have changed substantially 
and what the potential effects on fisheries might be. In addition, spatial scale for these models is 
large, but many important interactions happen at smaller scales. Future monitoring should have 
more flexibility with respect to the scale of sampling. The distribution as well as quantity of 
forage and predators should be considered in future modeling efforts. 
4. Specific sampling improvements: 
---Extend diet collection into spring and fall months to improve seasonal coverage for the 
all of the models. 
---Improve biomass, consumption, diet, and distribution information for forage fish species 
in all models. Specifically, AI myctophids and GOA capelin are highly influential groups in 
each ecosystem which are extremely data poor.  
---Improve bycatch accounting for seabirds in all fisheries. 
112
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
---Improve bycatch accounting in the Pacific halibut fishery. The lack of bycatch information 
in halibut fisheries of equivalent quality to that available for groundfish fisheries represents 
a significant data gap in these models which should be considered a high priority for 
improvement. 
---Improve diet information for the AI in general. 
---Improve rockfish diet information in all ecosystems.  
---Improve nontarget species biomass, consumption, and diet information in all ecosystems. 
Specifically, octopi and squid are monitored in federal groundfish fisheries and are 
important predators and prey with very poor diet information at present. Skates and sharks 
are important predators in Alaska which are receiving more fisheries interest, but which lack 
adequate biomass, and catch information for single species management. Diet information 
for sharks and skates is slowly improving, but is not at the level of quality for other managed 
groundfish.  
---Improve forage and low trophic level sampling: Large zooplankton such as euphausiids, 
mysids and copepods comprise a very different proportion of the groundfish diets among the 
three systems. If data on zooplankton density were available it would be useful to compare 
relative densities between systems, and also look at differences in where or when groundfish 
were collected for stomach samples to further clarify these differences. Fluctuations in the 
abundance of prey resources are difficult to assess for most of these groups at present. 
Furthermore, we may be underestimating other components of the zooplankton community 
because we estimate biomass through diets collected during summer. Prey such as pteropods 
are rare during summer, and we lack diet information for forage fish which may consume 
pteropods. Finally, while our results suggest low trophic level differences between systems, 
and it is quite feasible to attribute differences to physical properties of the systems, we must 
keep in mind that full evaluation of differences between the EBS, GOA, and AI at low 
trophic levels is hampered by data gaps at present. Further investigation is necessary to 
determine what real differences in utilization of primary and secondary production exist 
between systems. 
113
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
     
  
  
 
 
    
 
   
 
 
 
    
   
   
 
  
 
6. Appendix A: Description, Data Sources, and General 
Comparison for Each Species Group Across Ecosystems 
In this appendix, we describe which species are in which groups in each model, and briefly 
document the input data to the models. We also give brief cross-system comparisons for each 
species group. In each description below, biomass density is reported to facilitate cross-system 
comparisons; this number is equal to the absolute biomass of a group divided by the area of each 
model: 495,218 km2 for the EBS, 291,840 km2 for the GOA, and 56,936 km2 for the AI (Tables 
1, 2, and 3 in Section 1). Detailed estimation methods for biomass, P/B, Q/B, and diets of 
Cetaceans, Otters and Pinnipeds, Seabirds, Fish, Invertebrates and Primary Producer groups are 
presented in Appendix B. Tables reporting all numeric values of parameters used in the models, 
including biomass, P/B, Q/B, diets, and pedigrees are presented in Appendix C, Table C1-C29.  
6.1 Cetaceans 
‘Transient’ killer whales are a subpopulation of killer whales (Orcinus orca) which are believed to feed 
exclusively on other marine mammals; therefore they represent an apex predator in the all three ecosystems. In 
recent years, transient killer whale predation has been hypothesized to cause observed declines in Steller sea lions 
(e.g., Springer et al. 2003), although the mechanisms supporting this hypothesis have been questioned (Mizroch and 
Rice 2006). Male killer whales grow to lengths of 9 m and weights exceeding 8 t; females are generally smaller at 
less than 7 m length and 4 t (Leatherwood et al. 1983). 
Based on relative sighting rates, the population of transient killer whales is believed to be 10% of the ‘resident’ 
killer whales population (M. Dalheim, AFSC, pers. comm., 2003; Dalheim 1997). Therefore, based on resident killer 
whale population estimates (see below), at least 39 transient killer whales occupy the combined Bering Sea Aleutian 
Islands area (Waite et al. 2002), and 17 transient killer whales occupy the Gulf of Alaska (Dalheim 1997). The BSAI 
population was divided into 29 animals for the EBS and 10 for the AI (see Appendix B Section 7.2 for details). 
These numbers were multiplied by the average weight of 2.2 t each, resulting in a population density of 1.35E-4 
t/km
2 in the EBS model, 3.91E-4 t/km2 in the AI model, and 1.36E-4 t/km2 in the GOA food web model. 
In all modeled areas, the population production rate (P/B) of 0.0254 was estimated from the average survival of 
juveniles, male and female adults (Olesiuk et al. 1990), and the population consumption rate (Q/B) of 11.16 was 
estimated by scaling the average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) 
to an annual rate.  
Diet information for these important predators is lacking; therefore, Transient killer whales are assumed to feed 
on all marine mammal groups in proportion to each groups’ biomass (equal “preference” for all EBS, GOA, and AI 
mammals; Dahlheim and Heyning 1999, Frost et al. 1992, Jefferson et al. 1991, Rice 1968).  
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 7 (uncertain percentage of residents applied across the 
board). PB was given a pedigree of 3 in all systems because it is based on a species specific proxy (survival rate), 
while QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species 
sampled in neighboring regions/limited coverage).  
Transient killer whales have identical production and consumption parameters across systems by design; however, 
the density (biomass in t/km
2) in the AI is four times that in the EBS and GOA. Diet differences between systems 
reflect the local abundance of marine mammal prey, as we assumed that transient killer whales would consume any 
marine mammal in proportion to its abundance. Therefore, in the EBS transients rely primarily on fin whales (>70% 
of diet by weight), in the GOA they consume mostly fin and humpback whales (50 and 30%, respectively), and 
within the AI humpback and minke whales are their main prey items (65%, jointly). Under this assumption, transient 
killer whales have the most diverse diet in the AI and cause higher mortality on their prey than in other systems due 
to their higher density in the AI. There is no predation or fishing mortality on transient killer whales in any of the 
models.  
115
 
 
 
  
   
   
     
    
   
  
   
    
  
  
     
   
  
   
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
Sperm and beaked whales are a combined group representing large offshore toothed whales, but sperm whales 
(Physeter macrocephalus) dominate the biomass. Other members of the group are Stejneger’s beaked whale 
(Mesoplodon stejnegeri), Cuvier’s beaked whale (Ziphius cavirostris) and Baird’s beaked whale (Berardius bairdii). 
Sperm whales were heavily exploited in the North Pacific during the most recent period industrial pelagic whaling 
between 1960 and 1979 (Mizroch and Rice 2006), primarily for the high quality oil in the spermaceti organ found in 
their heads as well as for the ambergris found in their intestines. The size of the spermaceti organ makes the sperm 
whale’s head account for up to one third of body length, which can range to a maximum of 18 m in males and 12 m 
in females. Maturity is reached between the ages of 8 and 11 years for females and over 10 years for males, at sizes 
of 8 to 12 m and 13 to 44 t (Leatherwood et al. 1983). Sperm whales range throughout the North Pacific, exhibiting 
gender-specific migratory behavior; in the EBS, GOA, and AI, adult male sperm whales are found foraging along 
the continental shelf and slope during the summer months (Rice 1989).  
The North Pacific-wide sperm whale population estimate of 930,000 (Rice 1989) was multiplied by the fraction 
of the North Pacific represented by deep portions of the EBS (0.0011), GOA (0.0017), and AI shelves (0.0011) and 
scaled to reflect a residence time of half a year and the male proportion of the population (assuming a 50:50 sex 
ratio; see Appendix B Section B2 for details). This led to estimated sperm whale numbers of 265 (EBS), 399 
(GOA), and 253 (AI). Biomass was estimated as the number of whales in each ecosystem times the adult male 
average body weight of 33 t, to give a density of 0.0177 t/km
2 in the EBS, 0.045 t/km2 in the GOA and, 0.146 t/km2 
in the AI.  
The P/B of 0.0469 for all ecosystems was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified 
using the surrogate life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991); see Appendix B2 for details. Sperm whales were 
assumed to follow a human-like surrogate life table with an assumed longevity of 60 years to estimate P/B. The 
sperm whale Q/B of 6.61 was estimated by scaling the average individual body weights and daily caloric 
requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate.  
Sperm whale diets consist mainly of squids, with occasional consumption of octopus, salmon, skates, rockfish, 
and sablefish; the latter are sometimes removed from commercial longlines (Leatherwood et al. 1983, Hanselman et 
al. 2005). In the all three models, sperm whale diet is assumed to be 85% squids, with the remaining 15% of 
comprised of skates, rockfish, sablefish, sleeper sharks, adult cod, grenadiers and other miscellaneous deepwater fish 
in proportion to their biomass (Fiscus 1997, Kawakami 1980, Lowry et al. 1982, Nishiwaki 1972, Okutani and 
Nemoto 1964, Rice 1986, Tomilin 1957, Walker and Hanson 1999).  
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 6 (historical estimate). The PB and QB values were given a 
pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species sampled in neighboring 
regions/limited coverage). 
Sperm and beaked whales have the highest density in the AI, intermediate in the GOA, and lowest in the EBS. 
Energetics parameters were identical for all systems. These whales primarily prey on squid (85% of diet) and have 
no known sources of mortality in any of the three systems. Based on the proportionality assumption between 
consumption and abundance, it appears that the deep fish prey is more diverse in the GOA and the AI than it is in 
the EBS. This seems reasonable given the nature of the systems. The resulting estimated sperm whale mortality on 
adult sablefish is about 2% in the EBS and GOA systems (assuming neutral selection).  
‘Resident’ killer whales are a subpopulation of killer whales (Orcinus orca) which are believed to feed primarily 
on fish and squid, and do not feed on other marine mammals. Male killer whales grow to lengths of 9 m and weights 
exceeding 8 t; females are generally smaller at less than 7 m length and 4 t (Leatherwood et al. 1983). They are 
social animals, occurring in “pods” of up to 30 related individuals including adult males and females with juveniles 
and calves. There is limited information on killer whale growth, reproduction, maturity and longevity (Leatherwood 
et al. 1983).  
Approximately 174 individual resident killer whales are thought to occupy the Gulf of Alaska (Dahlheim 1997), 
and 391 are thought to occupy the combined Bering Sea Aleutian Islands area (Waite et al. 2002). Multiplying these 
numbers by an average weight of 2.2 t each, we estimate a population density of 1.36E-3 t/km
2 in the GOA food 
web model. 
Because there is no information to distinguish the production and consumption rates of transient from resident 
killer whales, the same rates were used for both groups. The population production rate (P/B) of 0.0254 was 
estimated from the average survival of juveniles, male and female adults (Olesiuk et al. 1990), and the population 
116
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
    
  
   
     
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
     
 
  
  
    
   
    
  
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
  
consumption rate (Q/B) of 11.16 was estimated by scaling the average individual body weights and daily caloric 
requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate.  
Diet information for these important predators is lacking; therefore, Resident killer whales are assumed to feed on 
all continental shelf groundfish, salmon, and forage fish in proportion to each groups’ biomass (Dahlheim and 
Heyning 1999; Frost et al. 1992; Yano and Dahlheim 1995; Rice 1968). 
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 3 for the GOA, downgraded to 4 for the EBS and AI (mark 
recapture proxy data for GOA, higher coefficient of variation for BSAI). PB was given a pedigree of 3 in all systems 
because it is based on a species specific proxy (survival rate), while QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general 
life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species sampled in neighboring regions/limited coverage).  
Resident killer whales have equal densities in the EBS and GOA, which are less than half that in the AI. Resident 
killer whales are assumed to prey on fish in proportion to abundance in each system, so that they eat more 
myctophids and squids in the AI, pollock and flatfish in the EBS, and arrowtooth, pollock, forage fish, halibut, and 
cod in the GOA. The only known source of mortality on this group in any model is from fishery bycatch. This is 
highest in the EBS, where it accounts for about 17% of total mortality; the pollock fishery alone contributes almost 
7%. This bycatch mortality represents about 3 t, the average weight of an adult killer whale being 2.2 t. In the GOA 
only 2% of the total mortality is due to fishing, while in the AI there is none. 
Porpoises are a combined group of small toothed whales. In the GOA food web model this group includes Dall’s 
porpoises (Phocoenoides dalli), harbor porpoises (Phocoena phocoena), and Pacific white sided dolphins 
(Lagenorhynchus obliquidens). In the EBS food web model, the group includes harbor and Dall’s porpoise, and in 
the AI model the group includes only Dall’s porpoise because the other two species are not found there (See 
Appendix B Section 7.2 for details). Harbor porpoises are the smallest animals in the group, while Pacific white 
sided dolphins are largest. Harbor porpoises reach maximal lengths of 1.5 m, and are found in small groups or 
individually in nearshore areas of the EBS and GOA, where they feed on a variety of schooling fish species 
(Leatherwood et al. 1983). Dall’s porpoises reach sizes up to 2.2 m, and are distributed throughout a variety of 
coastal and oceanic habitats where they feed primarily on squid and pelagic forage fishes. Unlike harbor porpoises, 
Dall’s porpoises can be found in very large aggregations offshore, and often ride vessel bow waves (Leatherwood et 
al. 1983). Pacific white sided dolphins are the largest, most gregarious, and farthest offshore of the dolphins in this 
group. They grow to maximum lengths exceeding 2.3 m and can be found in groups numbering in the hundreds in 
waters over the continental slopes of the GOA, where they feed on squid and schooling pelagic forage fishes 
(Leatherwood et al. 1983). 
There are an estimated 24,119 harbor porpoises in the EBS, and 31,012 in the Gulf of Alaska (Hobbs and Waite 
in review), so at an average body weight of 31 kg (Hunt et al. 2000) the estimated biomass of harbor porpoises is 
6.04E-4 kg/km
2 in the EBS, and 3.29E-3 kg/km2 in the GOA. The early 1990s population of Dall’s porpoise in the 
GOA was estimated at up to 106,000, and the AI population was estimated at 302,000 (Hobbs and Lerczak 1993), 
but the actual population size may be only 20% of that estimate due to their attraction to the vessels used to count 
them (Turnock and Quinn 1991). Similarly, a recent EBS estimates of Dall’s porpoise was 24,119 (Moore et al. 
2002), but a similar 20% correction factor needs to be applied. Therefore, the EBS, GOA, and AI food web model 
Dall’s porpoise biomass are estimated as 20% of 302,000, 106,000, and 24,119 respectively, times an average 
weight of 62 kg (Hunt et al. 2000) for a density of 6.04E-4 in the EBS, 4.50E-3 in the GOA, and 6.58E-2 t/km
2 in 
the AI. The early 1990s estimate of Pacific white sided dolphin population size was 26,880 in the Gulf of Alaska 
(Bukland et al. 1993), so multiplying that by an average weight of 79 kg (Hunt et al. 2000) we estimate a population 
density of 7.28E-3 t/km
2 . The sum of all porpoise biomass in the EBS is therefore 3.62E-3 t/km2 , in the GOA is 
0.0151 t/km2, and in the AI is 0.0658 t/km2. See Appendix B, Section B2 for further details.  
Mortality rates are poorly known for porpoises in the North Pacific; therefore the P/B of 0.05 was estimated as an 
average of mortality rates for porpoises in other areas (Caswell et al. 1998). Consumption rates for porpoises were 
estimated for each group from average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. 
(2000); the Q/Bs estimated by this method were 27.5, 32.6, and 25.9, for Dall’s porpoise, harbor porpoise, and 
Pacific white sided dolphins respectively. For the aggregate porpoise group a Q/B of 30 was used in all systems 
based on the average values for harbor and Dall’s porpoises. 
Food habits data for porpoises are lacking, but the generally described diets of all of these species are similar. The 
assumption made in the GOA model is that 69% of porpoise diet is squids, 18.5% is pelagic forage fish in 
proportion to each group’s biomass, and the remainder is small benthic fish such as eelpouts, small sculpins, and 
117
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
     
 
 
    
    
 
   
 
  
  
   
 
  
  
   
    
  
 
     
 
    
  
    
  
    
  
   
 
    
   
miscellaneous shallow fish in proportion to each group’s biomass (Crawford 1981, Fiscus and Jones 1999, Gearin et 
al. 1994, Walker et al. 1998). 
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 3 for the EBS and GOA, downgraded to 4 for the AI (proxy 
data for EBS and GOA, higher CV for AI). PB and QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history 
proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species sampled in neighboring regions/limited coverage).  
Porpoises have a higher proportion of total mortality caused by transient killer whales in the AI (23%) than in any 
of the other ecosystems; in both the EBS and GOA predation by transients is low and very similar (<6%). Dall’s 
porpoises are the only species within the porpoise complex in the AI, making its diet composition heavily reliant on 
squid (90%), whereas in the GOA and EBS both Dall’s and harbor porpoises are distributed, making the diet 
composition a lot more varied and less reliant on cephalopods in these two areas. 
Beluga whales (Delphinapterus leucas) are distinctive white medium-sized toothed whales which inhabit Arctic 
waters. They are found in social groups numbering in the hundreds to thousands in a wide variety of habitats ranging 
from sea ice to open water to river mouths. Belugas reach ages of at least 25 years and lengths of 4.5 m for adult 
males, with females generally smaller and with substantial differences in size between regional stocks (Leatherwood 
et al. 1988). Five stocks of belugas are currently identified: Bristol Bay, Eastern Bering Sea, Chukchi Sea, Beaufort 
Sea, and Cook Inlet (Laidre et al. 2000).  
In the EBS, the population estimates for the Bristol Bay and Eastern Bering Sea stocks for the years 1999-2000 
were combined for a total EBS belugas population estimate of 20,025 animals (Angliss and Lodge 2002). An 
average body weight of 303 kg was applied to this population estimate to arrive at the biomass density for belugas in 
the EBS model, 3.01E-3 t/km
2 . Belugas were not included either in the AI or the GOA models. Belugas have not 
been sighted in the AI model area (Laidre et al. 2000). The inshore Cook Inlet population of belugas is outside the 
GOA model area, and Cook Inlet belugas are only rarely found outside Cook Inlet on the continental shelf of the 
GOA within the model area (Laidre et al. 2000, Hobbs et al. 2005). 
The P/B of 0.112 was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the surrogate 
life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991); see Appendix B2 for details. Beluga whales were assumed to follow a 
monkey-like surrogate life table with an assumed longevity of 30 years to estimate P/B. The beluga whale Q/B of 30 
was estimated by scaling the average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. 
(2000) to an annual rate. 
Belugas reportedly feed on small forage fishes, crabs, and cephalopods ((Leatherwood et al. 1988). In the EBS 
model, belugas were assumed to feed on small forage fishes, including juvenile pollock, juvenile cod, and other 
juvenile commercial species, in proportion to those forage species abundance.  
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 4 (a proxy with high variance, limited confidence or 
incomplete coverage). PB and QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a 
pedigree of 6 (species sampled in neighboring regions/limited coverage).  
Belugas’ diet composition had all prey items with the same preference, but resulting proportions were highest for 
juvenile pollock, eelpouts, sand lance and other sculpins, which jointly contribute over 60% to the belugas’ diet.  
Gray whales (Eschrichtius robustus) are baleen whales which pass through the GOA on their annual migrations 
between the EBS and the Gulf of California, one of the longest migrations undertaken by any animal. The eastern 
Pacific gray whales may be the last of three historical gray whale stocks; the Atlantic stock was extirpated in the 
1600-1700s, and the western Pacific stock is thought to be close to extinction. These whales grow to over 14 m and 
35 t, reaching maturity somewhere between 5 and 11 years old (Leatherwood et al. 1983). Gray whales differ from 
other baleen whales in feeding primarily on benthic, rather than pelagic, invertebrates, especially benthic gammarid 
amphipods.  
The eastern Pacific gray whale population is estimated to number 22,284 individuals (Rugh et al. 2005), which 
are estimated to spend ~5% of the year foraging in each of the EBS and GOA during their annual migration. Gray 
whales do not forage in the AI. For both the EBS and the GOA model, an estimated 1000 animals were assumed to 
occupy each model area in a given year, weighing an average of 16.2 t per animal (Hunt et al. 2000). This results in 
118
 
 
  
 
   
  
    
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
    
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
  
  
     
  
    
 
 
   
    
 
   
 
  
   
 
a total biomass density of .0.0327 t/km2 in the EBS, and 0.0554 t/km2 in the GOA. Details are given in Appendix B, 
section B2. .  
The P/B of 0.0634 was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the 
surrogate life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991); see Appendix B2 for details. Gray whales were assumed to 
follow a monkey-like surrogate life table with an assumed longevity of 60 years to estimate P/B. The gray whale 
Q/B of 8.87 was estimated by scaling the average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in 
Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate. 
Gray whales are assumed to eat primarily benthic amphipods (90%) of diet, with the remaining 10% of diet 
allocated among other benthic invertebrate groups in proportion to their biomass (Lowry et al. 1982, Nerini 1984, 
Rice and Wolman 1971, Tomilin 1957, Zimushko and Lenskaya 1970).  
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 5 for the EBS and GOA, with no biomass in the AI (uncertain 
scaling factors or extrapolation of migratory population by area). PB and QB values were given a pedigree of 6 
(general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species sampled in neighboring regions/limited 
coverage). 
Gray whales are almost identical for most characteristics between the GOA and EBS models, and are not distributed 
in the AI. Transient killer whales, their only predator, account for ~4% of the total mortality. Mortality due to 
fishing only occurs in the GOA subsistence fisheries, but in a negligible amount (<0.003%). 
Humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae) also make long seasonal migrations between temperate feeding 
grounds and tropical breeding grounds in coastal areas, and are distributed in both the Atlantic and Pacific. The 
north Pacific populations were hunted extensively throughout the 19
th and 20th centuries, especially as stocks of the 
larger blue and fin whales declined (Webb 1988). Humpback whales reach maximum sizes of 15-16 m, with adult 
females generally larger than males (Leatherwood et al. 1983).  
Population size in the Gulf of Alaska has recently been estimated at 1,712 individuals, and in the AI at 268 
individuals (Zerbini et al. 2006). Multiplied by an average body weight of 30.4 t (Hunt et al. 2000), the density 
estimate used in the GOA food web model is 0.178 t/km
2 , and in the AI model is 0.143 t/km2. In the EBS, an older 
population estimate of 394 animals (Calambokidis et al. 1997) was reduced by 50% to account for time spent 
foraging in the EBS and was multiplied by the same average body weight for a density estimate of 0.0121 t/km 2. 
Details are given in Appendix B, section B2. 
The P/B of 0.0377 was estimated using a survival rate estimated from repeated sightings of individual whales 
(Mizroch et al. in press). The humpback whale Q/B of 7.58 was estimated by scaling the average individual body 
weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate. 
Humpback whales feed on zooplankton (especially euphausiids) and small pelagic fishes, often employing a 
unique feeding behavior where the whales surround a school of prey by blowing bubbles which rise to the surface 
and concentrate the prey; the whale then swims vertically up through the concentrated prey with its mouth agape, 
often breaking the surface when its mouth snaps shut (Leatherwood et al. 1983). In the GOA food web model, 
humpback whales were assumed to have a diet composition of 60% euphausiids and other large zooplankton in 
proportion to their biomass, and the remaining 40% of salmon and small pelagic fishes such as capelin, eulachon, 
sand lance in proportion to their biomass (Kawamura 1980; Nemoto 1957, 1959, 1970; Nemoto and Kawamura 
1977; Tomilin 1957).  
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 4 for the AI and GOA, downgraded to 5 for the EBS (direct 
but uncertain estimates for AI and GOA, uncertain extrapolation in EBS). PB was given a pedigree of 2 in all 
systems (direct regional estimate) and QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were 
given a pedigree of 6 (species sampled in neighboring regions/limited coverage). 
Humpback whales have a higher mortality from predation by transient killer whales in the AI (30% versus <10% in 
EBS and GOA); the EBS is the only ecosystem where bycatch occurs (4% of total mortality). Otherwise, the EBS 
and GOA are similar with transient killer whales contributing almost 4% to total mortality. The diets resulting from 
the preference method (proportionality assumption between consumption and abundance) have very similar 
proportions in all three ecosystems.  
119
 
 
   
   
   
 
    
   
    
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
    
  
      
 
 
 
      
 
  
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
  
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
    
 
 
  
  
 
Fin whales (Balaenoptera physalus) are the second-largest living animals in the world, growing to a maximum size 
of 24 m in the Northern hemisphere (Leatherwood et al. 1983). Eastern North Pacific fin whales were 
extraordinarily heavily exploited throughout the 20th century. More whales were taken from the Gulf of Alaska and 
Eastern Bering Sea during 1961-1967 than during all previous 20th century whaling combined: the recorded 
removals in these seven years amount to 1.5 million t, and the majority of this catch was of fin whales (Mizroch and 
Rice 2006).  
In the EBS, the current population estimate of fin whales is 4,051 animals (Moore et al. 2002). The current 
population of fin whales in the Gulf of Alaska is estimated at 1,397 individuals (Zerbini et al. 2006). There are an 
estimated 45 fin whales in the AI model area (Zerbini et al. 2006). Assuming that the average weight of a fin whale 
is 55.6 t (Hunt et al. 2000), the biomass density in the EBS food web model is estimated to be 0.0455 t/km
2 , in the 
GOA food web model is 0.2661 t/km2, and in the AI model is 4.4E-2 t/km2. 
The P/B of 0.0267 was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the surrogate 
life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991). Fin whales were assumed to follow a human-like surrogate life table with 
an assumed longevity of 105 years to estimate P/B. The fin whale Q/B of 6.52 was estimated by scaling the average 
individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate.  
Fin whales are assumed to eat primarily large pelagic zooplankton (60%) in proportion to the biomass of each 
large zooplankton group, another 20% of their diet is copepods, and the remaining 20% of fin whale diet is allocated 
among pelagic forage fish groups in proportion to their biomass (Nemoto, 1957, 1959, 1970). 
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 4 for all ecosystems (direct but uncertain estimates). PB and 
QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species sampled 
in neighboring regions/limited coverage). 
Fin whales have nearly identical mortality and diets in the EBS and GOA, except that fishery bycatch contributes a 
very small proportion to total mortality in the GOA (<1%). Transient killer whales are their only predator and they 
account for 10% of total mortality. In the AI, fin whales have no accounted sources of mortality either from fisheries 
or from predation. 
Sei whales (Balaenoptera borealis) are named using the Norwegian word for pollock (which resemble pollock), 
“seje” (Leatherwood et al. 1983). Sei whales grow to a maximum size of 17-18.6 m, with females larger than males, 
and mature between 6 and 12 years of age. There is some evidence that age at maturity for sei whales decreased 
under heavy exploitation, and that their populations may have increased in the Southern hemisphere while their 
larger competitors blue, fin, and right whales were heavily exploited (Leatherwood et al. 1983). Sei whale 
exploitation increased in the North Pacific after fin whale stocks declined late 1960s (Mizroch and Rice 2006).  
The most recent estimate of sei whale numbers in the entire North Pacific ranged from 7,260 to 12,620 individuals 
(Tilman 1977). Taking the midpoint of this range and assuming that the EBS model area represents 1.87% of the 
North Pacific, we estimate that 187 sei whales might occupy this area. Similarly, the GOA model area represents 
1.1% of the North Pacific, so we estimate that 110 sei whales are in the GOA. The AI is 0.21% of the North Pacific, 
so 21 sei whales are estimated to occupy the AI. At an average of 16.8 t per animal, the estimated density for the 
EBS food web model is 0.00633 t/km
2 , is 0.00633 t/km2 GOA food web model, and 0.00633 t/km2 in the AI model.  
 The P/B of 0.0400 was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the surrogate 
life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991). Sei whales were assumed to follow a human-like surrogate life table with 
an assumed longevity of 70 years to estimate P/B. The sei whale Q/B of 9.79 was estimated by scaling the average 
individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate.  
In the North Pacific sei whales are assumed to eat primarily copepods (Leatherwood et al. 1983; we assumed 80% 
of diet); another 5% of their diet is squids, 5% is large zooplankton in proportion to their biomass, and the remaining 
10% of sei whale diet is allocated among pelagic forage fish groups in proportion to their biomass (Klumov 1963; 
Nemoto 1957, 1959, 1970; Nemoto and Kawamura 1977). 
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 7 for all ecosystems (incomplete source with a wide range). 
PB and QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species 
sampled in neighboring regions/limited coverage).  
Sei whales have similar diets and sources of mortality in the EBS and GOA; transient killer whales are their only 
predator, accounting for ~7% of total mortality. They are not part of the bycatch in either system. The slightly more 
diverse diet in the GOA is due to the distribution of groundfish in prey preferences; for example the high biomass of 
120
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
  
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
   
  
  
   
  
   
   
  
 
  
  
 
EBS pollock dominates the EBS Sei whale diet percentages, while prey items are more evenly proportioned in the 
GOA. Sei whales are not present in the AI.  
Right whales (Eubalaena glacialis) are so called because they were the “right” whale to hunt; they historically 
inhabited relatively shallow nearshore areas, and floated when killed, yielding large quantities of oil and baleen. In 
the Gulf of Alaska, right whales were the main target of the first round of pelagic whaling in the North Pacific, and 
were heavily exploited from 1835 until 1848 (Scarff 2001, Shelden et al. 2005), and again illegally until 1967 
(Mizroch and Rice 2006). Right whales are robust animals, growing to 17 m but weighing as much as 100 t each; 
this huge girth is supported by a nearly exclusive diet of copepods (Leatherwood et al. 1983). 
Today, an estimated 100 right whales may exist in the entire North Pacific, with 59 of these animals thought to 
be in the EBS, 35 in the Gulf of Alaska, and 7 in the AI (Angliss and Lodge 2002, Wada 1973). Assuming that an 
average sized right whale might weigh 30 t today (Hunt et al. 2000), the biomass for the EBS, GOA, and AI models 
was estimated to be 0.0035 t/km
2. 
The P/B of 0.0328 was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the surrogate 
life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991). Right whales were assumed to follow a human-like surrogate life table 
with an assumed longevity of 85 years to estimate P/B. The right whale Q/B of 8 was estimated by scaling the 
average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate.  
Right whales were assumed to eat 95% copepods and 5% larger pelagic zooplankton, distributed in proportion to 
the biomass of those groups (Klumov 1962, 1963; Nemoto 1970; Omura et al. 1969; Omura 1958).  
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 7 for all ecosystems (incomplete source with a wide range). 
PB and QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species 
sampled in neighboring regions/limited coverage).  
Right whales have very similar results to those of sei whales; transient killer whales account for ~8% of the total 
mortality which was identical in both systems. So was the diet, since 95% of it was assumed to be fixed 
consumption of copepods. Right whales are not present in the AI. 
Minke whales (Balaenoptera acutorostrata) are the smallest whales in the large-rorqual whale genus Balaenoptera, 
growing to a maximum size of 9.2 m and less than 10 t, and maturing at the age of 7-8 years in the Northern 
hemisphere (Leatherwood et al. 1983).  
An estimated population of 1,813 minke whales lives in the EBS (Moore et al. 2002). Approximately 105 minke 
whales are thought to occupy the Gulf of Alaska and an additional 846 live in the AI at present (Zerbini et al. 2006). 
With an average weight of 6.6 t (Hunt et al. 2000) the density of minke whales estimated in the EBS food web 
model is 0.024 t/km
2 , in the GOA is 0.0024 t/km2, and in the AI is 0.0976 t/km2. 
The P/B of 0.0511 was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the surrogate 
life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991). Minke whales were assumed to follow a monkey-like surrogate life table 
with an assumed longevity of 50 years to estimate P/B. The minke whale Q/B of 7.78 was estimated by scaling the 
average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate.  
Minke whales are thought to feed on the most abundant pelagic animals, which are euphausiids in Antarctic 
waters and are fish in the North Pacific (Leatherwood et al. 1983). Therefore, in the GOA food web model, a diet 
including 56% pelagic forage fish, and 40% pelagic zooplankton, proportioned by the biomass of each group in 
those categories, was assumed for minke whales. The remaining 4% of diet was divided equally between copepods 
and squids (Klumov 1963; Nemoto 1959,1970; Omura and Sakiura 1956; Tomilin 1957). 
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 4 for all ecosystems (proxy with high variation). PB and QB 
values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species sampled in 
neighboring regions/limited coverage). 
Minke whales have an almost identical estimated total mortality in the EBS and GOA. Variations in the proportions 
of prey items in the diets among the models are again due to the differences in prey abundance distribution within 
each ecosystem. By design, forage fish, cephalopods and juvenile pollock are equally preferred and make up 56% of 
the minke’s diet in all three ecosystems. However due to prey abundance, in the EBS, sand lance are second to 
juvenile pollock, whereas in the GOA capelin, followed by sand lance and several other forage fish are a higher 
121
 
 
 
 
 
     
        
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
percentage of Minke’s diet, to which juvenile pollock contributes but a small portion. The AI minke whale’s diet is 
evenly distributed among all forage fish groups and juvenile pollock.  
Bowhead whales (Balaena mysticetus) are large baleen whales related to right whales which reach maximum 
lengths of 18 m and weights up to 50 t. They forage in icy habitats in groups of dozens, migrating along with 
seasonal changes in the ice edge from the Bering Sea to the Beaufort Sea (Leatherwood et al. 1988, Shelden and 
Rugh 1995). Bowheads were commercially harvested from 1848 to 1900 by “Yankee whalers” from New England, 
which severely depleted the stock (Bockstoce 1978, Shelden and Rugh 1995). Five stocks of Bowhead whales range 
throughout Arctic waters worldwide; the Bering Sea stock is the only one found in our model areas and it is 
distributed in the EBS only (Moore and Reeves 1993).  
At present, an estimated 8,200 bowheads are thought to remain in the Bering Sea stock (IWC 1996, Zeh et al. 
1995). One third of these animals feed within the EBS area; for these whales, the EBS model area is 10% of the full 
range of the stock, and they spend 5 months of the year or 42% of their time foraging in the model area (Moore and 
Reeves 1993, Lowry et al. 1993). Therefore, 8,200 times 0.33 times 0.1 times 0.42 gives 113 bowhead whales in the 
EBS model area. Averaging 31.506 t each, the resulting density estimate used in the model is 7.17E-3 t/km
2. 
The bowhead whale PB of 0.01005 was derived from a survival estimate given in Zeh et al. (2003). The bowhead 
whale Q/B of 8.68 was estimated by scaling the average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements 
listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate.  
Bowhead whales feed primarily on euphausiids, copepods, and other zooplankton, with some small proportion of 
the diet composed of benthic invertebrates (Lowry et al. 1993, Shelden and Rugh 1995). In the EBS, bowheads were 
assumed to feed on 40% copepods, 55% pelagic zooplankton including euphausiids, mysids, pelagic amphipods and 
chateognaths in proportion to their abundance. The remaining 5% of diet was composed of benthic invertebrates 
including all crabs, other epifauna and infauna. 
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 5 for the EBS (highly uncertain scaling factors). PB was 
given a pedigree of 1 since it was derived from a direct independent method specific to this stock of bowheads. QB 
was given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 6 (species sampled in 
neighboring regions/limited coverage). 
Bowhead whales are distributed in the EBS only. Predation mortality by transient killer whales accounts for about 
one fourth of the total mortality. There is indigenous catch of these animals in the northern Bering Sea, however this 
was not included in the model because it is outside the bounds of the EBS ecosystem. 
6.2 Sea Otters and Pinnipeds 
Sea Otters (Enhydra lutris) are mustelids, most closely related to terrestrial weasels and skunks. These small 
carnivores live in nearshore areas of Alaska, and have recovered from heavy exploitation which began in the 18 th 
century and continued until the beginning of the 20th. Sea otters have been shown to fundamentally structure 
nearshore ecosystems with their predation on sea urchins, which allows more growth of kelp, which provides habitat 
for a multitude of creatures (Reeves et al. 1992). The sea otter population in the Aleutian Islands and western Gulf 
of Alaska was estimated to decline at a rate of 17.5% per year during the 1990’s (Doroff et al. 2003).  
The EBS and AI ecosystems are thought to support approximately 15,000 sea otters each at present (Angliss and 
Lodge 2002), which translates into densities of 0.00075 t/km
2 in the EBS and 0.117 t/km2 in the AI assuming that a 
sea otter weighs 25 kg on average (Hunt et al. 2000). In the Gulf of Alaska, a population of over 40,000 sea otters is 
thought to exist today (Angliss and Lodge 2002), which translates to a biomass density of 0.00345 t/km 2 using the 
same average weight. 
For sea otters, the P/B was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the 
surrogate life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991). Sea otters were assumed to follow a fur seal-like surrogate life 
table with an assumed longevity of 20 years to estimate a P/B of 0.117. The Q/B of 73 was estimated by scaling the 
average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate.  
122
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
  
   
  
    
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
   
  
    
  
   
  
   
   
  
   
   
 
  
  
    
  
    
   
 
     
    
 
   
   
 
Sea otter diet changes radically between summer/autumn and winter/spring, and decadal diet changes have also 
been observed (Estes et al. 1981, Watt et al. 2000). In the AI model, otters consume 62% sea urchins, 19% 
miscellaneous shallow fish, 11% greenlings, sand lance, and managed forage in proportion to the abundance of these 
categories, and 8% selected benthic invertebrates in proportion to abundance (Watt et al. 2000). For the EBS and 
GOA food web models, only summer diets were considered (June- September average). Sea otters were estimated to 
derive 75% of their diet from sea urchins and crabs (allocated in proportion to those groups biomass), 20% of their 
diet from pelagic forage fish and juvenile groundfish, and 5% of their diet from squids (Watt et al. 2000).  
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 4 for all ecosystems (proxy with high variation). PB and QB 
values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 5 in the AI (estimated 
using uncertain scaling factors/extrapolation) and 7 in the EBS and GOA (multiple incomplete sources with wide 
range). 
Sea otters are preyed upon by transient killer whales in the AI more heavily than in the other systems. Sea otters 
comprise only 2% of AI transient killer whale diet, but this amounts to about 10% of the sea otters’ total mortality in 
the AI. The higher density of transient killer whales in the AI (relative to the EBS and GOA), combined with less 
diversity and biomass of large cetaceans, increases their predation pressure on porpoises, sea otters, humpbacks, and 
minkes whales in the AI relative to other systems, hence the higher predation mortality rates for these groups. Diet 
preferences for sea otters are identical for the EBS and GOA; the composition was different for the AI so the greater 
proportion of echinoderms reflects the reported higher consumption of those benthic invertebrates there. 
Walrus and Bearded Seals is a model group combining the two largest ice-associated pinnipeds in the Eastern 
Bering Sea, which both forage on benthic invertebrates during the winter months when sea ice extends across the 
Bering Sea shelf. Neither of these animals is found in the AI or GOA model areas, so this group is unique to the 
EBS model. The Pacific walrus, Odobenus rosmarus rosmarus, is the second largest pinniped in the world (after the 
elephant seals, Mirounga spp.), reaching average sizes of 3.15 m and 1215 kg for males and 2.6 m and 812 kg for 
females (Reeves et al. 1992). Females mature at 8 years, with first pupping around the age of 10 due to 4-5 months 
delayed implantation and long (15 month) gestation periods. Pups are nursed for over two years, hence females give 
birth only every other year. Males mature around 10 years, but generally do not breed successfully until the age of 
15; walruses are thought to live to at least 40 years of age. Both male and female walruses have tusks, which are 
used to haul out on ice, to maintain breathing holes in ice, and for defensive displays. Floating sea ice provides 
important habitat for walruses, acting as both transportation during the annual migration between the Bering and 
Chukchi Seas and as a platform for breeding and for foraging in relatively shallow shelf waters. Walruses will haul 
out on land as well, but appear less likely to do so near human settlements, perhaps due to a long history of 
subsistence hunting (Reeves et al. 1992). Pacific walruses were hunted commercially for blubber and ivory during 
the 18
th century by the Russian American Company on the Pribilof Islands, and then farther north in the EBS by 
whalers targeting bowheads during the 19th and early 20th century; commercial hunting ceased after 1991, at which 
point the north Pacific population was thought to number around 200,000 animals (Reeves et al. 1992, Angliss and 
Lodge 2002). The bearded seal, Erignathus barbatus, grows to large size as well, reaching an average of 2.1 to 2.4 
m in length and 200-250 kg (which can range above 400 kg during spring) for both sexes. Females are mature at 3 
years but may not reproduce until 8 years of age, after which they are thought to reproduce annually. Males mature 
at 6-7 years. It is thought that most bearded seals do not live past 25 years (Reeves et al. 1992). Bearded seals have 
similar migratory habits to walruses, wintering in Bering Sea pack ice and summering in Chukchi Sea pack ice, 
although they are more solitary animals and generally avoid walrus aggregations within this habitat. Like walruses, 
bearded seals are an important subsistence resource for coastal Alaskan natives, who take more than 5,000 animals 
annually; they were commercially exploited by Russian sealers in the Bering Sea as recently as 1989 at the rate of 
1000-2000 animals annually (Reeves et al. 1992, Angliss and Outlaw 2005). The current number of bearded seals in 
the north Pacific is unknown, but was estimated at 250,000 to 300,000 animals in the late 1970s-early 1980s 
(Angliss and Outlaw 2005). 
Because the current population size of both walrus and bearded seals is highly uncertain, we used the most recent 
total population estimates of 200,000 walrus and 250,000 bearded seals (Angliss and Lodge 2002, Angliss and 
Outlaw 2005). Both walrus and bearded seals use the Eastern Bering Sea model are during the winter only, when sea 
ice is at its full southern extent, so the combined population estimate of 450,000 animals was multiplied by 25% to 
account for the approximately 3 month residence time in the model area, and then multiplied by 87.5%, the 
approximate maximum coverage of sea ice in the model area during the period 1989-1998 (Stabeno et al. 2001). The 
average weight for the group was calculated as a weighted average by population size, assuming a 1:1 sex ratio for 
walrus and the average weights for females and males reported above and assuming an average weight of 225 kg for 
123
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
  
  
   
    
   
 
 
   
   
 
   
    
 
  
  
  
  
      
   
   
    
  
  
  
  
 
   
  
   
  
  
    
  
     
    
  
 
    
  
 
bearded seals, or (1215 + 812 + (225 * 2.5)) / 4.5 = 575 kg, resulting in the EBS biomass density estimate of 0.114 
t/km2. 
The walrus and bearded seals group PB estimate of 0.0513 is based on a total annual mortality estimate of 5% 
(Perez 1990), where survivorship = 0.95, PB = -ln(0.95). The Q/B of 15.37 was estimated by scaling the average 
individual body weights and daily caloric requirements for walrus and bearded seals listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an 
annual rate.  
Both walrus and bearded seals forage on the continental shelf for benthic invertebrates. The walrus diet is 
dominated by bivalve mollusks, and supplemented by miscellaneous worms, snails, crabs, and shrimp. Bearded seals 
consume essentially the same prey, but in proportions less dominated by bivalves; especially in areas where they 
face competition for bivalves from walruses (Reeves et al. 1992). When proportioned by the mass of animals, the 
diet for the group most strongly resembles the diet of walruses; bivalves are over 70% of diet, miscellaneous worms 
are 18% of the diet, and various crustaceans make up the rest (Perez 1990). This group also feeds on wintering seals 
(0.10% of diet) because walruses are known to occasionally prey on other seals; the number was reduced from that 
reported in Perez (1990) to account for lower predation rates in the EBS model are relative to the Chukchi Sea.  
The data pedigree for walrus and bearded seal biomass in the EBS model was considered to be 5 (highly uncertain 
scaling factors used). PB and QB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a 
pedigree of 5 (correct species generalized from outside the model area).  
Walrus are found only in the EBS. Their diet is dominated by bivalves, which have a high estimated abundance in 
the EBS, based on survey data. A small proportion of their total mortality (<1%) is due to bycatch mortality. 
Northern Fur Seals (Callorhinus ursinus) are seasonal foragers in the Gulf of Alaska during their migrations to and 
from breeding areas in the Pribilof Islands (Eastern Bering Sea), where nearly three quarters of the world’s 
population breed (Angliss and Lodge 2002). Fur seals are not thought to forage in the Aleutian Islands during the 
short time they spend migrating through island passes. Therefore, the EBS and GOA models have fur seal groups, 
but the AI model does not. The entire population forages in the EBS during the summer breeding and pupping 
season from May through November. Primarily adult female and juvenile fur seals forage in the GOA after they 
leave the Pribilofs each November and when they begin to return from wintering areas off the U.S. West Coast in 
March (Reeves et al. 1992). Fur seals were heavily exploited on their breeding grounds in Alaska from the late 
1700s though the early 1900s by both Russian and American companies, as well as American, Japanese and 
Canadian pelagic sealers. Commercial harvests continued in a more regulated fashion after 1911 up until 1984. The 
population had increased to over a million individuals by the late 1960s, but declined thereafter through the early 
1980s. After a period of relative stability through the early 1990s, the herd has been declining again in recent years 
(Angliss and Outlaw 2005).  
The early 1990s population abundance of fur seals was estimated at 941,756 animals (Ream et al. 1999; Angliss 
and Lodge 2002). In the EBS model, this number was multiplied by 42.89% because fur seals forage only on the 
middle shelf and shelf break model areas during the summer, and then by an average weight of 40 kg (Perez 1990), 
resulting in a biomass density of 3.26E-2 t/km
2. Juvenile fur seal biomass in the EBS was estimated from pup counts 
conducted on the Pribilof Islands in the late 1980s and early 1990s, approximately 220,000 pups (Angliss and 
Outlaw 2005), multiplied by a 10 kg average juvenile body weight to result in an EBS juvenile fur seal biomass 
estimate of 1.91E-3 t/km
2. For the GOA model, the early 1990’s total population abundance was scaled down by 
93% to reflect the short residence time of the smaller (30-50 kg) female and juvenile fur seals spend foraging on the 
continental shelf of the Gulf of Alaska. (Adult male fur seals are much larger animals, reaching weights of 175-275 
kg; Reeves et al. 1992). Therefore, 7% of the population with an average weight of 40 kg each resulted in a GOA 
model biomass density of 6.3E-3 t/km
2 for adult fur seals. Adult and juvenile fur seals were modeled separately to 
distinguish ontogenetic shifts in diet. Juvenile fur seal biomass is unknown in the Gulf of Alaska, so was assumed to 
be 10% of the juvenile fur seal biomass used in the Eastern Being Sea model, to reflect the short residence time in 
the GOA shelf region.  
The P/B for northern fur seal groups was estimated by Siler (1979) using a competing risk model. The juvenile 
P/B of 0.116 and the adult P/B of 0.091 were estimated assuming a longevity of 25 and a fur seal survivorship curve 
(Siler 1979). The adult fur seal Q/B of 39.03 was estimated by scaling the average individual body weights and daily 
caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate. Because data in Hunt et al. (2000) were inadequate 
to calculate a juvenile fur seal Q/B in a similar manner, juveniles were assumed to have the same growth efficiency 
(GE = P/B / Q/B = 0.002) as adults. Therefore, the juvenile fur seal Q/B of 49.5 was calculated as juvenile P/B 
divided by adult GE.  
124
 
 
    
  
  
    
    
 
    
  
 
  
  
    
    
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
   
   
    
 
   
    
    
  
  
 
  
  
 
   
   
 
  
  
  
Diets for northern fur seals in the EBS were derived from Perez (1990) which reported food habits collections 
taken from pelagically foraging seals between 1958 and 1974. In the EBS, fur seals fed primarily on juvenile 
pollock (31% of diet) and squids (31%), and to a lesser extent on capelin (16%), juvenile herring (6%), myctophids 
(4%), and Alaska plaice (4%). Diets of fur seals in the GOA model were derived from Perez and Bigg (1986) which 
reported food habits collections taken from pelagically foraging seals in the 1970s. In the GOA, fur seals fed 
primarily on two forage species, sand lance (34%) and capelin (38%), and fed to a lesser extent on pollock (8.5%), 
squids (6.5%), salmon (2%), rockfish (2%), herring (3.5%), and other miscellaneous fish (5.5%). GOA Juvenile fur 
seals were modeled with diet preferences including both juvenile and adult groundfish, while adult fur seals fed 
more on the larger adult groundfish. 
The data pedigree for adult northern fur seal biomass in the EBS model, and for both adult and juvenile fur seal 
biomass in the GOA model was considered to be 4 (direct estimate with high variation). In the EBS model, juvenile 
fur seal biomass data was rated 3 (proxy with known but consistent bias). Silers-model based PB values for both 
adults and juveniles were given a pedigree of 4 (proxy with known but consistent bias). Adult QB values were given 
a pedigree of 5 (general model specific to the area), while juvenile QB values were rated 7 (general relationship 
based on adult GE). Diets were given a pedigree of 5 (correct species but historical estimates). 
Transient killer whales, the major mammal predator in these systems, account for only 2% of juvenile and 3% of 
adult northern fur seal mortality in both EBS and GOA. There are more sources of adult fur seal mortality in the 
EBS due to subsistence harvest combined with fishery bycatch relative to the GOA, where only subsistence harvest 
accounts for mortality. However, the bycatch contributes only about 1% of the total fur seal mortality in the EBS. 
Diet differences between systems are based on measured differences from foraging seals in each area, although the 
foraging data for both systems is historical. 
Steller Sea Lions (Eumetopias jubatus) are apex predators which are resident year-round in the Eastern Bering Sea, 
Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska. They are the world’s largest otariid pinniped, growing to over 3 m and 1 ton 
(males) or 2 m and 350 kg (females; Reeves et al. 1992). Two distinct stocks of Steller sea lions are recognized 
within U. S. waters: the eastern and western U. S. stocks. The first includes individuals east of Cape Suckling, 
Alaska (144°W), and the second includes those at and west of Cape Suckling (Loughlin 1997); the populations 
represented in the EBS, AI, and GOA food web models belong entirely to this last stock. Between 1998 and 2000, 
the western stock was estimated to decline 10.2% in the Bering Sea/ Aleutian Island region (Angliss and Lodge, 
2004). There are some eight different hypotheses that have been proposed to explain the decline of Steller sea lions. 
Bottom-up forcing hypotheses include nutritional limitation due to either 1) fisheries removals of sea lion prey or 2) 
climate change/ regime shift reduction in sea lion prey or prey quality. Top-down forcing hypotheses include 
increased mortality due to 3) predation by killer whales, 4) purposeful killing, 5) subsistence uses, 6) bycatch, 7) 
infectious disease(s) and 8) toxic environmental substances (this last one may be bottom-up as well). Some have 
concluded the evidence is more consistent with a top-down forcing scenario and involves a combination of increased 
predation, illegal shooting in the early 1980’s, bycatch mortality and subsistence harvest (NRC, 2003). The decline 
of the western stock prompted the listing of Steller sea lions as endangered under the ESA criteria (up from 
“threatened”). NMFS responded to the listing by implementing some changes to fishery management, most notably: 
1) a more precautionary rule for setting harvest limits of major sea lion prey, 2) extension of 3 nautical mile 
protective zones around rookeries and haulouts not currently protected, 3) closures of many areas around rookeries 
and haulouts to 20 nmi, 4) establishment of 4 seasonal pollock catch limits inside critical habitat and two seasonal 
limits outside of critical habitat, and 5) establishment of a procedure for setting limits on removal levels in critical 
habitat based on the biomass of target species in critical habitat. A revised SEIS (Supplemental Environmental 
Impact Statement) was developed in 2001 and resulted in a preferred alternative that includes area-specific 
management measures designed to reduce direct and indirect interactions between the groundfish fisheries and 
Steller sea lions, particularly in waters within 10 nmi of haulouts and rookeries (Angliss and Lodge, 2004). 
In all three food web models, Steller sea lion abundance was the average of 1991 and 1994 estimates for 
rookery/haulouts in the Gulf of Alaska as estimated by a spatial model (Fay, 2004). In the EBS and AI models, 
Steller sea lions were divided into adult and juvenile groups. In the GOA food web model, Steller sea lions were 
divided into both spatial and ontogenetic groups to capture different patterns in foraging by both juveniles and adults 
in the Central and Western GOA model areas. We first describe the division between adults and juveniles, and then 
describe the spatial groupings under the diet description below. Juveniles were defined as age 1 animals, called 
"yearlings" in the literature, whereas pups would be called "young of the year" or age 0 animals. Some studies 
125
 
 
 
  
    
   
  
 
   
     
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
   
    
  
 
    
  
   
     
 
    
  
    
 
 
     
   
 
   
    
  
  
   
  
    
  
 
consider 2-4 year old sea lions as juveniles, but we did not for the following reasons. While Steller sea lions do not 
reach sexual maturity until 3-8 years of age (Reeves et al. 1992), there is no information on how they distribute 
themselves for foraging purposes between ages 2 and 4, and therefore there is no way to separate them meaningfully 
from adults spatially or by diet. There is some telemetry data for the 1 year olds, which we are calling juveniles, and 
which do appear to forage closer to shore than their adult counterparts (NMFS 2003). This means our "adult" pool 
represents animals ages 2 and up. Since NMFS surveys of sea lion rookeries and haulouts regularly count both 
“pups” and “non-pups”, we can calculate the age 2+ biomass for a year following a survey as the previous year’s 
"non-pups” minus last years counted pups. The previous year’s pup count is used to estimate age 1 sea lion biomass 
by applying a mortality rate derived from a published life table (York 1994). Weight at age for female, male and 
pregnant female sea lions (Winship, 2001; York 1994) were averaged to get a juvenile (age 1) average weight of 
about 100 kg and an adult (ages 2-30) average weight of about 300 kg. These average weights were then used to 
convert abundance into biomass estimates. In the EBS model, adult sea lion biomass was 1.47E-3 t/km
2, and 
juvenile sea lion biomass was 1.5E-4 t/km2. GOA central adult sea lion biomass was 1.08E-2 t/km2 and central 
juvenile was 1.03E-3 t/km2; GOA western adult biomass was 5.08E-3 t/km2 and western juvenile biomass was 
6.61E-4 t/km2. AI adult sea lion biomass was 5.21E-2 t/km2 and juvenile biomass was 5.45E-3 t/km2. 
For Steller sea lion juveniles and adults, the P/B was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) 
as modified using the surrogate life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991). Steller sea lions were assumed to follow a 
fur seal-like surrogate life table with an assumed longevity of 30 years to estimate a P/B of 0.109 for adults and 
0.494 for juveniles. The adult Steller sea lion Q/B of 24 was estimated by scaling the average individual body 
weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate. Because data in Hunt et al. 
(2000) were inadequate to calculate a juvenile Steller sea lion Q/B in a similar manner, juveniles were assumed to 
have the same growth efficiency (GE = P/B / Q/B = 0.0046) as adults. Therefore, the juvenile Steller sea lion Q/B of 
108 was calculated as juvenile P/B divided by adult GE.  
In the EBS model, sea lion diets were derived from Perez (1990). Bering Sea Steller sea lions feed primarily on 
adult pollock (33%), followed by octopi (18%), juvenile cod (7%), sculpins (6%), and capelin (6%), and other fish, 
squids, and some benthic invertebrates. In the AI model, sea lion diets were derived from Merrick et al. (1997). 
Aleutian Islands Steller sea lions feed overwhelmingly on Atka mackerel (65% of diet), followed by adult pollock 
(9%), salmon (7%), squid (6%), cod (4%), and other fish and cephalopods. Steller sea lions display marked changes 
in diet between the central and western Gulf of Alaska (Sinclair and Zeppelin 2002). Therefore, we established 
separate model groups for sea lions in the Central GOA corresponding to marine mammal management areas in the 
eastern and central GOA (roughly fishery management areas 620 thro ugh 640 in Figure 1), and for sea lions in the 
Western GOA corresponding to marine mammal management areas in the western GOA and eastern Aleutian 
Islands (roughly fishery management area 610 in Figure 1). Diets for Central and Western Steller sea lions were 
reported in the 2000 Biological Opinion (NMFS 2000). We used summer diets reported for 1990-1994 to be most 
compatible with groundfish diets, also collected during summer surveys. The Central group of sea lions eats 
primarily adult pollock (40%) followed by salmon (20%) and arrowtooth flounder (16%), with the remainder of the 
diet comprised by various forage fish and cephalopods. The Western group has a slightly more diverse diet, but still 
eats primarily adult pollock (40%), followed by salmon (17%), herring (7%), Atka mackerel (7%), and sand lance 
(5%), followed by various fish and cephalopods.  
The data pedigree for adult and juvenile Steller sea lion biomass in all models was considered to be 2 (direct 
estimate with limited corroboration for the spatial model’s interpolation of the count data). Silers-model based PB 
values for both adults and juveniles were given a pedigree of 4 (proxy with known but consistent bias). Adult QB 
values were given a pedigree of 5 (general model specific to the area), while juvenile QB values were rated 7 
(general relationship based on adult GE). Diets were given a pedigree of 4 in the AI and GOA (direct estimates for 
correct time period but with high variation) and 5 in the EBS (correct species but historical estimates). 
Steller sea lion juveniles have higher predation mortality from transient killer whales in the AI (about 2%) than in 
the EBS and GOA (less than 1% of total mortality), likewise in adult Steller sea lions (10% in AI vs. 2% in GOA 
and EBS). Diets were assigned independently for adults and juveniles in each system based on the best available 
data, but we made a consistent assumption between models that juvenile sea lions eat adult and juvenile pollock by 
preference (proportional to abundance), while adult sea lions eat only adult pollock (Sinclair, pers comm.). These 
models reflect what is already known about Steller sea lion diets, in that it is dominated by different prey in each 
system. 
126
 
 
   
  
  
    
 
 
 
 
   
      
  
   
 
    
    
 
   
  
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
  
   
     
   
   
  
  
  
 
     
  
   
  
  
    
   
  
  
 
  
   
 
Resident Seals is a model group that includes only harbor seals (Phoca vitulina) in the GOA and AI models, and 
includes both harbor seals and ribbon seals (P. fasciata) in the EBS model. Harbor seals are distributed throughout 
the Northern hemisphere, but they grow to a larger size (1.7 to 1.9 m and 80 to 140 kg for females, males) in the 
North Pacific than in the North Atlantic (Reeves et al. 1992). They mature at 3-7 years and may live to 30 years. 
Three stocks of harbor seals are defined in the western Gulf of Alaska, in southeast Alaska, and in the Bering Sea for 
management purposes, but it is not clear whether they are distinct biological stocks. The overall harbor seal 
population appears to be stable to increasing (Small 1996). Ribbon seals are found primarily in the Bering, Okhotsk, 
and Chukchi Seas, where they are associated with the ice-edge, following its seasonal movements. These seals grow 
to average sizes of 1.75 m and 90 kg for both sexes, mature at 3-5 years of age, and live at least 20 years (Reeves et 
al. 1992). Population status is difficult to determine for ribbon seals; a mid-1970’s estimate of 90,000 to 100,000 
animals was given for the Bering Sea resident ribbon seals, with no more recent estimates available (Angliss and 
Outlaw 2005).  
For the EBS resident seal biomass estimate, we used population estimates from Perez (1990): 45,000 harbor seals 
and 66,000 ribbon seals were estimated to occupy the region year round, so the total of 111,000 animals was 
multiplied by an average weight of 60 kg to arrive at a biomass density of 0.01345 t/km
2 for resident seals in the 
EBS. In the AI we used the estimated harbor seal number of 3,437 animals and multiplied that by the average body 
weight of 60 kg, resulting in an AI model biomass density of 3.62E-3 t/km
2. We took the early 1990s Gulf of Alaska 
population estimate of 16013 individuals (Angliss and Lodge 2002) and multiplied that by an average body weight 
of 60 kg to estimate the food web model density of 3.3E-3 t/km
2 . 
For harbor seals, the P/B was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the 
surrogate life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991). Harbor seals were assumed to follow a fur seal-like surrogate life 
table with an assumed longevity of 30 years to estimate a P/B of 0.082. The harbor seal Q/B of 17.4 was estimated 
by scaling the average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an 
annual rate. Lacking additional information for ribbon seals, the harbor seal parameters were applied to the entire 
resident seals group in the EBS model. 
In the EBS, resident seal diet composition was estimated by averaging diet compositions for harbor seals and 
ribbon seals reported in Perez (1990). This results in a combined diet dominated by miscellaneous fish (15%), adult 
pollock (15%), octopi (11%), non-pandalid (10%) and pandalid shrimp (6%), and capelin (6%), followed by other 
fish and invertebrates. No diet information was available for harbor seals in the AI, so the EBS diet was modified to 
include higher proportions of Atka mackerel to replace 4% of the pollock in the diet from the EBS. Harbor seal food 
habits information was not available for the Gulf of Alaska, so we modified food habits from the Strait of Georgia 
(BC, Canada) reported by Olesiuk (1993). In the Strait of Georgia, harbor seals fed primarily on hake, so we 
assumed they would feed primarily on pollock in the Gulf of Alaska based on the functional similarity of the species 
in the two systems. All other species were common to the two ecosystems, so the final diet was pollock (42.6%), 
herring (32.4%), salmon (4%), miscellaneous shallow fish (12%), with the remainder of the diet comprised of small 
amounts of cod, rockfish, flatfish, cephalopods, and benthic invertebrates. 
The data pedigree for resident seal biomass in all models was considered to be 5 (highly uncertain scaling 
factors/extrapolation). Silers-model based PB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). QB 
values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 5 in all models (same 
species in neighboring region). 
Resident seals have similar sources of mortality between the AI and GOA, except that transient killer whales 
contribute a higher proportion to total mortality in the AI (14% versus 3% in GOA) and subsistence fisheries takes 
more than transients in the GOA (20% versus 10% in AI). In the EBS predation mortality by transients is around 3% 
and subsistence fisheries contribute a minimal amount to total mortality (1%). Differences across the systems in diet 
composition are partially the result of different seal species compositions in this category, and partially the result of 
prey preferences interacting with different groundfish abundances. For example, GOA diet composition is based on 
info from the Strait of Georgia, and based only on harbor seals; the diet composition for the EBS and the AI is 
similar but represents different species between the areas. 
Wintering Seals are a model group combining ringed seals and spotted seals, which are found only in the EBS 
model area during the winter period of ice cover. These seals are separated from the walrus and bearded seal group 
because they are smaller and forage differently from walrus and bearded seals, even though they occupy the EBS 
model area during the same time of year. Ringed seals (Phoca hispida) are found throughout the Arctic Ocean, and 
127
 
 
    
      
  
 
    
   
 
 
      
    
  
   
   
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
   
  
    
   
range into the Bering Sea to Bristol Bay in the winter, where adults occupy land-fast ice and juveniles range into the 
pack ice at sea (Reeves et al. 1992, Angliss and Outlaw 2005). Ringed seals grow to maximum sizes 1.1 to 1.5 m 
and 50 to 70 kg, with considerable weight loss during the spring molt. Age at maturity varies by population, but 
most males and females are mature by age 5 to 7 years, and the maximum age may be up to 40 years. Ringed seals 
are unique among the pinnipeds in building a “birth lair” by tunneling into snow atop hard frozen ice, where the 
female nurses the pup and leaves it during foraging trips (Reeves et al. 1992). Ringed seals are an important 
subsistence resource for coastal Alaskan natives, who take an estimated 2,000 to over 9,000 seals annually from the 
entire population (mostly north of the EBS model area, Angliss and Outlaw 2005). Spotted seals ( P. largha) range 
throughout the Beaufort, Bering, and Chukchi Seas and the Sea of Okhotsk, where they are also associated with the 
ice edge during winter (Reeves et al. 1992, Angliss and Outlaw 2005). Spotted seals reach maximum sizes of 1.6-1.7 
m and 82-123 kg; they mature at 3-5 years with females maturing as much as a year earlier than males, and they live 
up to 35 years. Unlike ringed seals, which prefer land fast ice covered with snow to build birth lairs, spotted seals 
give birth on smaller ice floes at the ice edge (Reeves et al. 1992). Like ringed seals, spotted seals are important to 
Alaskan native communities for subsistence; recent estimates indicate that over 5,000 animals are taken annually 
(Angliss and Outlaw 2005). 
The wintering seals group biomass for the EBS model was estimated using winter Bering Sea abundances of 
ringed and spotted seals reported in Perez (1990), which results in a category composition of approximately 75% 
ringed seals and 25% spotted seals. Because abundances reported in Perez (1990) included the population from the 
northern Bering Sea outside the EBS model area, the abundance was reduced by half to account for animals 
occupying only the southern model area. The resulting abundance of 348,838 animals was multiplied by an average 
body weight (including juveniles) of 43 kg, resulting in a biomass density of 3.029E-2 t/km
2. 
For wintering seals, the P/B was estimated using Siler’s competing risk model (Siler 1979) as modified using the 
surrogate life tables of Barlow and Boveng (1991). Ringed and spotted seals were both assumed to follow a fur seal-
like surrogate life table with an assumed longevity of 40 and 35 years, respectively. A weighted average of each 
species P/B estimate (75% ringed, 25% spotted) resulted in a combined group P/B of 0.069. The wintering seal Q/B 
of 19.2 was estimated by scaling the average individual body weights and daily caloric requirements for ringed and 
spotted seals listed in Hunt et al. (2000) to an annual rate. 
Both ringed and spotted seals forage on a wide range of prey including zooplankton, benthic invertebrates, and 
fish, which changes seasonally and varies by area (Reeves et al. 1992). Diet composition for wintering seals was 
estimated by taking a weighted average of ringed (75%) and spotted (25%) seal diets reported in Perez (1990). The 
resulting diet composition for the group is dominated by adult pollock (44%), followed by miscellaneous fish (10%), 
capelin (8%), other sculpins (8%), a variety of shrimp and worms (8%), eelpouts (6%), juvenile pollock (5%), 
juvenile herring (4%), and several flatfish and other species.  
The data pedigree for wintering seal biomass in the EBS model was considered to be 5 (highly uncertain scaling 
factors/extrapolation). Silers-model based PB values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). QB 
values were given a pedigree of 6 (general life history proxy). Diets were given a pedigree of 5 in all models (same 
species in neighboring region). 
Wintering seals are only found in the EBS, where most of the mortality is caused by predation from walruses (85%) 
despite the fact they constitute a low percentage of the walrus’ diet (0.1%) , This is one of the few predator-prey 
relationships that are exclusive to one of the systems, as both wintering seals and walruses are only found in the 
EBS. 
6.3 Seabirds 
Shearwaters (Procellariidae, genus Puffinus) includes at least two species in Alaska, the sooty shearwater (P. 
griseus) and the short-tailed shearwater (P. tenuirostris). These small seabirds (787g and 543 g body weight on 
average, respectively) are known to form some of the largest flocks of any seabird in areas of high food abundance. 
For example, short-tailed shearwaters migrate from breeding areas near Tasmania, around North Pacific to arrive in 
Alaskan waters during summer. Huge flocks (10,000 to 1 million individuals) aggregate to feed on euphausiids and 
forage fish in coastal and continental shelf regions. Unimak Pass in the eastern Aleutians (GOA model area) is 
regularly occupied by vast flocks of short-tailed shearwaters during summer (Piatt, 2005: photo and text available at 
128
 
 
  
    
 
   
  
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
    
  
     
  
  
    
 
  
  
    
   
   
    
   
      
 
   
 
      
  
 
  
 
http://www.absc.usgs.gov/research/seabird_foragefish/photogallery/Picture_of_Month/Dec05-STSH/Dec05­
STSH.html ). 
The combined biomass of AI shearwaters is estimated at 1.8E-3 t/km2 , which was derived from the Beringean 
Seabird Catalog colony counts for the North Pacific, multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert 
abundance to biomass estimates (Appendix B Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). The 
combined biomass of shearwaters is poorly known in the EBS and GOA. In the EBS, a density of 4E-4 t/km
2 was 
assumed for shearwaters, and in the GOA shearwater density was assumed to be the same as the density of storm 
petrels in the GOA, 2.3E-4 t/km
2 . 
P/B was estimated at 0.1 using an annual mortality rate estimated in Furness (1987). Q/B was estimated at 73, 
from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
Shearwaters consume primarily forage fish and squids in the EBS, AI, and GOA. A generalized shearwater diet 
applied to both species in each area was derived from Hunt et al. (2000). In all three areas, capelin and squids are 
primary prey items at approximately 40% and 26% of diet, respectively, and in the AI myctophids are also important 
forage (20% of AI shearwater diet).  
The data pedigree for shearwater biomass is 6 in all models (historical estimate/single study outside area). 
Shearwater P/B and Q/B estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were 
rated 6 (mix of species across regions). 
The majority of shearwater mortality in all models is unexplained, reflecting their position as apex predators in all 
systems. Fulmars account for the majority of predation mortality the AI and EBS. Small amounts of mortality (<5%) 
are attributable to fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems. One striking difference between models is the high 
proportion of shearwater’s mortality (20%) in the GOA from Steller sea lions (juvenile and adult combined), this is 
the only system where seabirds have been reported as sea lion prey. The report appeared in the Steller Sea Lion 
Biological Opinion (NMFS 2000), and was incorporated into the model as a very low proportion of the diet 
preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups; we are unable to determine how realistic this result is 
relative to the other systems.  
Murres (Alcidae, genus Uria) includes two species in Alaska, the common murre (U. aalge) and the thick billed 
murre (U. lomvia). The common murre is a large alcid (body length 38–43 cm, wingspan 64–71 cm; 800–1,125 g) 
with circumpolar distribution from 68–33°N. It is found mostly at sea with significant breeding grounds throughout 
Alaska, including the Gulf of Alaska. The common murre breeds on cliff ledges, sloping island surfaces, or flat 
areas on rocky headlands and islands in full ocean view. In nonbreeding season they are often found close to shore, 
even up inlets and sounds. However, during breeding season they are most common where prey gets concentrated by 
oceanographic fronts, tidal sheers, and similar oceanographic features that are located within flight range of 
colonies. In warmer climate regimes, common murres feed further inshore from shelf break (Ainley et al. 1990, 
Oedekoven et al. 2001). The thick billed murre is one of the most numerous seabirds in the Northern Hemisphere. 
Thick billed murres are most often found farther offshore than common murres, in water >30 m deep (Springer 
1991). In spring and early summer, these birds are strongly associated with margin of land-fast ice, especially where 
free-floating ice covered <50% of water adjacent to ice edge. Their distribution may be influenced by bottom 
topography and tidal phase, where strong tidal currents occur among islands and reefs (Cairns and Schneider 1990), 
also by the occurrence of oceanic fronts (Gaston and Hipfner, 2000).  
The combined biomass of Murres was derived for each model area from the Beringean Seabird Catalog colony 
counts, multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert abundance to biomass estimates (Appendix B 
Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). In the EBS, murre biomass density was estimated at 
8.14E-3 t/km
2, for the Gulf of Alaska 4.8E-3 t/km2, and for the AI 1.34E-3 t/km2. 
P/B was estimated at 0.169, equivalent to total mortality estimated by Schreiber and Burger, 2002) and QB was 
estimated at 72, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000). Their primary diet is comprised by midwater schooling fishes 
(cod, smelt, sand lance) and crustacea, especially pelagic amphipods and euphausiids; also benthic fishes (sculpins 
Cottidae, blennies Blennioidea, lumpsuckers), deepwater fishes (lanternfish), shrimps (Crangonidae), squid, and 
annelids. In all three models, the primary diet item is juvenile pollock (27%), followed by capelin in the GOA, 
Pacific ocean perch in the AI, and juvenile cod in the EBS.  
129
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
   
      
   
  
     
   
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
 
   
 
    
     
   
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
The data pedigree for murre biomass is 4 in all models (direct estimate with high variation). Murre P/B and Q/B 
estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were rated 6 (mix of species 
across regions). 
Similar to other seabird groups, the majority of murre mortality in all models is unexplained, reflecting their position 
as apex predators in all systems. Fulmars account for the majority of predation mortality the AI and EBS. Small 
amounts of mortality (<3%) are attributable to fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems. One striking difference 
between models is the high proportion of murre mortality (11%) in the GOA from Steller sea lions (juvenile and 
adult combined), this is the only system where seabirds have been reported as sea lion prey. The report appeared in 
the Steller Sea Lion Biological Opinion (NMFS 2000), and was incorporated into the model as a very low 
proportion of the diet preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups; we are unable to determine how 
realistic this result is relative to the other systems.  
Kittiwakes (Laridae, genus Rissa) includes two species in Alaska, the red-legged (R. brevirostris) and black-legged 
(R. tridactyla) kittiwakes. The red-legged kittiwake is a small gull, with a mean total length of 372 mm (range 353– 
392 mm) which found nearly exclusively in Alaska, within 120–150 km of breeding islands. It is thought to engage 
in night feeding when vertically migrating prey like lampfish (Myctophidae), and squid become available to surface-
feeding kittiwakes. This species is classified as Endangered in Russia which gives special protective status, such as 
restricted public access to nesting cliffs in the Commander Islands. The black-legged kittiwake is also a small gull, 
whose length averages 380–410 mm with mean body weight of 365–400 g. This bird usually nests on vertical sea 
cliffs, laying its eggs on narrow ledges—so narrow that most adults and chicks must face towards the cliff when on 
their nest, with their tails projecting over the edge. The black-legged kittiwake is one of the most widely distributed 
of our northern gulls, and one of the best studied. Ranging over the arctic, subarctic, and south, this species is also 
among the most pelagic of gulls. North American breeders winter offshore as far south as Florida and Baja 
California, and large numbers gather on the Grand Banks off Newfoundland and in ice-free waters off Alaska.  
The combined biomass of kittiwakes in all three models was derived from the Beringean Seabird Catalog colony 
counts for the Gulf of Alaska multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert abundance to biomass 
estimates (Appendix B Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). In the EBS and AI, both black-
legged and red-legged kittiwakes are present, although black-legged kittiwakes outnumber red-legged by 
approximately 5:1. Kittiwake biomass density in the EBS was estimated at 6.6E-4 t/km
2, and in the AI was 4.8E-4 
t/km2. Kittiwake biomass in the Gulf of Alaska is based only on black-legged kittiwakes, with a density estimated at 
8.9E-4 t/km2 , 
P/B for the group in all models was estimated at 0.076, from survival rates measured in Alaska (Schreiber and 
Burger, 2002) and QB was estimated at 110, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000); kittiwakes feed on a variety of forage fishes, which varies by 
model area according to the biomass of those forage fish. In the EBS, sand lance and juvenile pollock were 
estimated to be the primary prey, while in the AI myctophids, POP, and other managed forage were primary prey, 
and in the GOA capelin, juvenile pollock and sand lance were dominant in estimated diet composition. 
The data pedigree for kittiwake biomass is 4 in all models (direct estimate with high variation). Kittiwake P/B and 
Q/B estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were rated 6 (mix of 
species across regions). 
Similar to other seabird groups, the majority of kittiwake mortality in all models is unexplained, reflecting their 
position as apex predators in all systems. Fulmars account for the majority of predation mortality in the AI and EBS. 
Small amounts of mortality (<5%) are attributable to fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems. One striking difference 
between models is the high proportion of kittiwake mortality (27%) in the GOA from Steller sea lions (juvenile and 
adult combined), this is the only system where seabirds have been reported as sea lion prey. The report appeared in 
the Steller Sea Lion Biological Opinion (NMFS 2000), and was incorporated into the model as a very low 
proportion of the diet preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups; we are unable to determine how 
realistic this result is relative to the other systems.  
Auklets (Alcidae, genera Ptychoramphus, Aethia, and Cerorhinica) includes 6 species of auklets in the Gulf of 
Alaska: Rhinocerous, Least, Crested, Cassin’s, Parakeet and Whiskered auklets. They are plankton feeders and nest 
along rocky cliffs in the Gulf of Alaska. The Least auklet (Aethia pusilla) is the smallest alcid, with a total length of 
130
 
 
    
      
  
  
  
  
 
   
 
  
  
   
   
    
 
  
 
    
  
    
  
    
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
   
    
 
  
  
     
 
   
    
  
  
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
    
  
 
  
12–14 cm, a wingspan of 33–36 cm, and a mean adult mass about 85 g. This tiny alcid is one of the most abundant 
seabirds in North America, with a total population of about nine million. This species has a low survival rate relative 
to other alcids, with a predicted average life expectancy of about 4.5 years. Least auklets dive for plankton, nest in 
huge colonies in rock crevices, lay just one egg each year, and eat almost 90% of their weight per day—reflecting 
the high energetic demands of their flight and foraging. The total North American population may be about 
9,000,000 individuals (USFWS, 1988). Least auklet diet overlaps considerably with that of juvenile walleye pollock, 
and some Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus) species. The crested auklet (A. cristatella) is a small, highly gregarious 
alcid; with a total length of 18–20 cm, a wingspan of 40–50 cm, and adult mass averages about 260 g. Breeding 
colonies are located on sea-facing talus slopes, cliffs, boulder fields, and lava flows, all of which provide abundant 
rock crevices suitable for nesting. Compared to the least auklet, the crested prefers areas with larger boulders and 
crevices, but also lays a single egg per clutch. The crested auklet dives for its food, primarily euphasiids, and often 
forages in large flocks, suggesting foraging is socially facilitated. Individuals in feeding concentrations dive beneath 
sea surface and pursue prey in rapid wing-propelled underwater flight (Jones, 1993). Cassin’s auklet 
(Ptychoramphus aleuticus) is one of the most widely distributed of the Pacific alcids, and one of the best studied. It 
reaches an overall length 23 cm, and a mass 150–200 g. Found from Alaska south to Baja California, this small, 
abundant auklet nests in shallow burrows, which the birds excavate with their sharp toe nails, and also in rock 
crevices or under trees or logs on the ground. The total estimated population is believed to be at least 3.57 million 
individuals (Manuwal and Thorensen, 1993). Parakeet auklets (A. psittacula) grow to be 23–26 cm long and weigh 
238–347 g. They have the widest range of any of the Alaskan auklets, spanning the northern Gulf of Alaska, most of 
the Bering Sea, the north Pacific south of the Aleutian Islands, and the Sea of Okhotsk in Siberia. Their preferred 
breeding sites are in crevices along rocky cliff faces, although small breeding colonies may be located on rocky 
beaches, talus slopes, lava extrusions, and even grassy slopes with scattered boulders. Parakeet auklets feed over 
stratified mixed and shelf waters, avoiding, or at least not concentrating at, areas of turbulence and upwelling, unlike 
other auklet species (Hunt et al. 1993, 1998). Parakeet auklets breed at 174 colonies in Alaska, compared to only 33 
least auklet and 39 crested auklet colony sites, but populations at parakeet auklet colonies average much smaller 
(86% of parakeet auklet colonies contain <1,000 pairs breeding. Largest concentrations breed at St. George Island, 
Pribilof Island. (250,000 pairs) and King Island (Jones et al. 2001). The Whiskered Auklet ( A. pygmaea) is a small 
alcid endemic to an arc of volcanic islands formed by the Aleutian, Commander, and Kuril Island chains. This small 
alcid (17–19 cm and 120 g) breeds in rock crevices on oceanic islands. It feeds in nearshore marine waters, usually 
within 10 km of colonies. Feeding flocks are associated with convergent tidal fronts year-round, usually within 16 
km of islands, where zooplankton apparently concentrate. This habitat is characterized by well-mixed water with 
few gradients between surface and bottom. Dive depths are unknown, but the whiskered auklet is mostly found in 
areas where water < 100 m deep (Byrd and Willliams, 1993).  
The combined biomass of auklets for all three models was derived from the Beringean Seabird Catalog colony 
counts multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert abundance to biomass estimates (Appendix B 
Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). All auklet species were found in all ecosystems, except 
the rhinoceros auklet was absent from the EBS. In the EBS, estimated biomass density of auklets is 1.75E-3 t/km
2; 
in the AI, biomass density was estimated at 8.06E-3 t/km2. In the GOA, biomass density was estimated at 2.9E-4 
t/km2 , 
P/B was estimated at 0.169, from survival rates measured in Alaska (Schreiber and Burger, 2002) and QB was 
estimated at 110, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000). Copepods and euphausiids are the primary diet items in all three 
model ecosystems, comprising more than 80% of the generalized auklet diet.  
The data pedigree for auklet biomass is 4 in all models (direct estimate with high variation). Auklet P/B and Q/B 
estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were rated 6 (mix of species 
across regions). 
Similar to other seabird groups, the majority of auklet mortality in all models is unexplained, reflecting their position 
as apex predators in all systems. Fulmars account for the majority of predation mortality in the AI and EBS. Small 
amounts of mortality (<3%) are attributable to fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems. One striking difference 
between models is the high proportion of auklet mortality (12%) in the GOA from Steller sea lions (juvenile and 
adult combined), this is the only system where seabirds have been reported as sea lion prey. The report appeared in 
the Steller Sea Lion Biological Opinion (NMFS 2000), and was incorporated into the model as a very low 
proportion of the diet preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups; we are unable to determine how 
realistic this result is relative to the other systems.  
131
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
    
  
  
   
 
    
    
  
  
     
  
   
  
      
 
 
   
 
      
    
  
 
 
    
 
 
   
    
 
   
  
 
  
    
    
  
    
   
  
Puffins (Alcidae, genus Fratecula) are represented by two species in Alaska, the tufted (F. cirrhata ) and the horned 
(F. corniculata) puffins. Adult tufted puffins are the most pelagic of the Alcids, ranging widely from colonies in 
summer to find fish for their young, but feeding themselves largely on invertebrates, especially squid and 
euphausiids. During the nonbreeding season, adults migrate far south to oceanic waters of the Central North Pacific, 
where their diet consists largely of squid, euphausiids, and pelagic fish. Juveniles migrate south to the Central North 
Pacific after fledging and may not return to coastal breeding areas for several years. Thus, the tufted puffin, even 
more so than the horned puffin (Piatt and Kitaysky, 2002), is a pelagic species that spends most of its life at great 
distances from land and has a diet more similar to shearwaters and petrels (Pterodroma spp.) than to most other 
alcids. Nests are typically excavated in deep, vegetated turf on steep slopes or plateaus, well above shoreline. Where 
mammalian predators (e.g., foxes) are present, or normal habitat absent, breeding is usually restricted to inaccessible 
cliff crevices or inside sea caves. Large feeding flocks are commonly observed near island passes in Aleutians where 
rip currents concentrate prey. Prey are captured underwater using wing-propelled “flight”. The tufted puffin often 
forages in small groups of 10–20 individuals in association with other fish-feeding seabirds such as shearwaters, 
black-legged kittiwakes, glaucous-winged gulls, murres, horned puffins, and rhinoceros auklets (Piatt and Kitaysky, 
2002). The horned puffin nests on coastline and offshore islands in British Columbia (rare), the Gulf of Alaska, 
Aleutians, Sea of Okhotsk, Kuril Islands, Bering and Chukchi Seas. This bird winters over a broad area of the 
central North Pacific, generally over deep oceanic waters; about 76% of colonies and 87% of the world population 
of horned puffins is found in Alaska. The largest colonies are concentrated in the Gulf of Alaska along the Alaska 
Peninsula near the Semidi, Shumagin, and Sanak Islands. Some remain near breeding colonies in Aleutians and Gulf 
of Alaska, but most undergo general postbreeding dispersal to overwintering grounds in central North Pacific where 
juveniles possibly remain for 1–2 years before returning to breeding areas. Adults return to colonies en masse in 
spring. The horned puffin forages in low densities (0.1–2.0 individuals/km
2) in bay, shelf, and shelf-edge habitats 
throughout Alaska, generally within 100 km of colonies (Piatt and Kitaysky, 2002a).  
The combined biomass of puffins for all three models was derived from the Beringean Seabird Catalog colony 
counts multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert abundance to biomass estimates (Appendix B 
Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). Both puffin species were found in all ecosystems. In 
the EBS, estimated biomass density of puffins is 4.7E-4 t/km2; in the AI, biomass density was estimated at 4.1E-3 
t/km2. In the GOA, biomass density was estimated at 6.5E-3 t/km2 , 
Puffin P/B was estimated at 0.04, from an annual mortality rate derived by Furness (1987), and QB was 
estimated at 73, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000). Puffins feed on a mix of small forage fish, so diets were estimated 
to be dominated by capelin in the GOA, sand lance in the EBS, and an equal mix of shallow water forage fish in the 
AI. 
The data pedigree for puffin biomass is 4 in all models (direct estimate with high variation). Puffin P/B and Q/B 
estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were rated 6 (mix of species 
across regions). 
Unlike the other seabird groups, the majority of puffin mortality is unexplained only in the EBS model. Fulmars 
account for 51% of puffin mortality in the AI, and Steller sea lions account for 50% of puffin mortality in the GOA. 
The GOA is the only system where seabirds have been reported as sea lion prey. The report appeared in the Steller 
Sea Lion Biological Opinion (NMFS 2000), and was incorporated into the model as a very low proportion of the 
diet preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups; we are unable to determine how realistic this result is 
relative to the other systems. Up to 10% of puffin mortality is attributable to fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems. 
Fulmars (Fulmarus glacialis) are related to shearwaters, petrels, and albatross. This medium-sized bird (length 45– 
50 cm, wingspan 102–112 cm, mass 450–1,000 g) exhibits a generally pelagic distribution pattern with no true 
directed migrations, except possibly in high-arctic populations displaced by advancing sea ice in winter. Fulmars 
prefer to breed on precipitous sea cliffs of small to large islands or mainland promontories, often in mixed colonies 
with other cliff-breeders (murres [Uria spp.], kittiwakes [Rissa spp.], and cormorants [Phalacrocorax spp.]). 
However, fulmars use upper, more densely vegetated portions of cliffs, canyons, and gullies with less severe slopes 
and greater soil accumulation. Observations suggest that most foraging during chick-rearing occurs closer to 
colonies, probably <100 km away. Fulmars obtain food by dipping, surface-seizing, surface-plunging, pursuit-
diving, and scavenging; apparently unable to pick up prey while on the wing. In Alaska, foxes (Alopex and Vulpes), 
rats (Rattus norvegicus), ground squirrels (Spermophilus spp.), and other mammals widely introduced in late 1800s 
132
 
 
  
  
  
    
  
     
   
    
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
   
    
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
    
 
 
  
  
    
  
    
  
and early 1900s (Bailey 1993) reduced or eliminated some former colonies. Heavy predation by fox also likely in 
the West Pacific, particularly Kuril Is., from animals introduced by Japanese fur farmers in early 20 th century (Hatch 
and Nettleship, 1998). 
The combined biomass of fulmars for all three models was derived from the Beringean Seabird Catalog colony 
counts multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert abundance to biomass estimates (Appendix B 
Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). In the EBS, estimated biomass density of fulmars is 
5.2E-4 t/km
2; in the AI, biomass density was estimated at 4.9E-3 t/km2. In the GOA, biomass density was estimated 
at 8.2E-4 t/km2 , 
P/B was estimated at 0.055, from an annual mortality rate derived by Furness (1987), and QB was estimated at 
73, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
Fulmars are omnivorous, mainly feeding on fish, cephalopods (mainly squids), zooplankton (especially 
amphipods, copepods, and other crustaceans), offal, and carrion. Offal includes fish refuse (livers, entrails, and 
whole fish discarded by trawlers and factory ships), as well as remains of whales, walruses, and seals, especially 
blubber. General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000). In all three models, fulmars are estimated to feed on squid 
for a majority (59%) of their diet, followed by juvenile pollock in the GOA and EBS (26-30%) and POP in the AI 
(15%).  
The data pedigree for fulmar biomass is 4 in all models (direct estimate with high variation). Fulmar P/B and Q/B 
estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were rated 6 (mix of species 
across regions). 
The majority of fulmar mortality is unexplained in the EBS and AI models, with fulmars themselves accounting for 
the majority of predation mortality on fulmars in these systems. As with other seabird groups, Steller sea lions cause 
the majority of fulmar predation mortality in the GOA, based on a very low proportion of the diet preference 
(0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups. Less than 8% of mortality is attributable to fishery bycatch in the 
three ecosystems. Within the Aleutians, fulmars overall contribute at least 10% to the predation mortality of all 
seabird groups, reaching up to 50% for puffins. In the GOA and EBS fulmars account for a lower percentage of 
predation mortality 4 to 15% and 3 to 12%, respectively. By design, all seabird group diet preferences are identical 
between areas, and all models have seabirds jointly comprising 0.15% of the fulmars diet. The resulting effects of 
fulmars on predation mortality are the combined result of seabirds’ density, which in the AI happen to be all higher 
than in the other systems. Its worth noting that fulmars eat chicks and chick productions rates are not accounted in 
the models, so predation mortality of fulmars on other seabirds may be overestimated.  
Storm Petrels (Hydrobatidae) are represented by at least two species in Alaska, Leach’s storm petrel 
(Oceanodroma leurcorhoa), and the fork-tailed storm petrel (O. furcata). Leach’s storm petrel breeds mainly in the 
Aleutian Islands, although there are also many colonies off Alaska Peninsula; the northernmost are small ones at 
Wooded Island, off Prince William Sound at 59°52’N, 147°25’W. Nesting habitat consists of islands far enough 
offshore to avoid predatory mammals. Foraging habitat is in the open sea, wherever zooplankton and nekton of 
suitable size are available. Leach’s storm petrel feeds by pecking at individual organisms while hovering over the 
surface, occasionally pattering on the surface, as Wilson’s Storm-Petrel commonly does, or sitting on water. Some 
surface fishes (e.g., rockfish [Sebastes sp.]) are prominent in storm petrel diets, but deep-water fish, especially 
myctophids, are even more so. These and vertically migrant plankton in the diet imply nocturnal feeding, but fish 
considered midwater species (e.g., Vinciguerria lucetia) come to the surface often enough in daylight to be taken as 
prey, sometimes in great numbers. Other prey include cephalopods (squids, octopuses), crustaceans (euphausiids, 
decapods, amphipods, isopods, mysids, copepods), and jellyfish (Scyphozoa) (Huntington et al. 1996). The fork-
tailed storm petrel is the second most abundant and widespread of storm-petrels breeding in the North Pacific. The 
core of fork tailed petrel distribution is offshore islands of Alaska, particularly in the Eastern Aleutian Islands. In 
Alaska there are some 60 colonies of fork-tailed storm-petrels, 39 of these are in the Gulf of Alaska. Individuals use 
different breeding habitats, ranging from talus slopes to crevices under large trees or rocks. Nesting habitat of 
majority of populations characterized by subarctic maritime tundra, comprising grasses ( Elymus sp., Festuca sp.), 
sedges (Carex sp.), and umbelliferae (Heracleum sp., Angelica sp.) among or under which burrows may be found. In 
general, nests are crevices among rocks, sod, or roots where birds can stay dry. Nests distributed from sea level to 
island tops. Fork tailed storm petrels are surface feeders, seizing prey while hovering over, or landing briefly on, 
ocean surface. In eastern populations, primary prey include amphipods; Myctophid and other deep-water fish, 
133
 
 
 
   
    
  
 
   
   
 
   
  
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
    
   
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
  
 
  
  
  
 
   
    
 
 
 
   
  
   
   
    
 
 
shallow-water fish, rockfish, greenling, sablefish, copepods, euphausiids, decapods, and squid comprise other main 
prey items (Boersma and Silva 2001).  
The combined biomass of storm petrels for all three models was derived from the Beringean Seabird Catalog 
colony counts multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert abundance to biomass estimates 
(Appendix B Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). In the EBS, estimated biomass density of 
storm petrels is 1.75E-6 t/km
2; in the AI, biomass density was estimated at 3.5E-3 t/km2. In the GOA, biomass 
density was estimated at 2.3E-4 t/km2 , 
P/B was estimated at 0.12, from an annual mortality rate derived by Furness (1987), and QB was estimated at 
144, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000) and the references listed above. The major prey items in the storm 
petrel diets are estimated to be squids (61%), copepods (16-18%), and euphausiids (12-15%) in all three models.  
The data pedigree for storm petrels biomass is 4 in all models (direct estimate with high variation). Storm petrel P/B 
and Q/B estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were rated 6 (mix of 
species across regions). 
Similar to other seabird groups, the majority of storm petrel mortality in all models is unexplained, reflecting their 
position as apex predators in all systems. Fulmars account for the majority of predation mortality in the AI and EBS 
while Steller sea lions cause the majority of storm petrel predation mortality in the GOA, based on a very low 
proportion of the diet preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups. Small amounts of mortality (<4%) 
are attributable to fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems. 
Cormorants (Phalacrocoracidae) include at least three species in Alaska, the double crested ( Phalacrocorax 
auritus), the pelagic (P. pelagicus) and the red-faced (P. urile). The double crested cormorant is the most common 
cormorant in North America, ranging from freshwater to saltwater habitats across the continent; it is also longer but 
lighter than either of the other cormorants found in Alaska, with a length up to 80 cm but a weight of about 1700 g 
(Sibley 2000). The pelagic cormorant is smaller, reaching lengths of 51–76 cm, with males larger than females 
(average mass: male, 1,750–2,034 g; female, 1,531–1,702 g). This cormorant is the most widely distributed of six 
cormorant species inhabiting the North Pacific, ranging from the Arctic waters of the Chukchi and Bering Seas 
south through temperate waters along the North American Pacific Coast to Baja California and along the Asian coast 
to southern China. It is among the least gregarious or social of the cormorants, nesting on steep cliffs along rocky 
and exposed shorelines, either in loose colonies or far from nearest neighbors. Migration occurs primarily in 
northern populations. Nesting colonies are located on suitable cliffs of forested, grassy, and rocky islands and 
headlands, but it also uses ledges of sea caves, beached driftwood logs, sand spits, and human-made structures such 
as navigation beacons, bridges, wharves, empty ship hulls, and abandoned towers. It forages in waters in Gulf of 
Alaska to about 36 m; it is often found in waters up to 100 m deep, but foraging depths have not been confirmed in 
these waters. The red-faced cormorant may be the least known of all North American species. It is a medium-sized 
cormorant (length 75–100 cm; males larger than females: average mass for males, 2,400 g; females, 1,850 g) which 
breeds in a narrow, latitudinally compressed band from the northern Sea of Japan, along the Kuril and Aleutian 
Island chain, and far east into the southeastern Gulf of Alaska. Possibly owing to its shy habits and inaccessible 
colony sites, it is one of the least studied and least known birds of the North Pacific: little is known beyond 
distribution and rudiments of ecology. The red-faced cormorant is exclusively marine and ventures onto land only to 
breed or roost, never intruding more than a few meters from the edge of the sea. It sometimes is observed flying far 
out to sea, but is more commonly associated with the inshore and coastal waters of islands and continental shelves. 
Cormorants are generalist feeders; their diet consists predominantly of medium-sized fish, but they also consume 
invertebrates, marine worms, and crustaceans. In Alaska, black-legged kittiwakes and cormorants compete for nest 
space. Red-faced cormorants arrive early to occupy nesting cliffs and possibly dominate and exclude pelagic 
cormorants from the best nesting sites. Gulls and double-crested cormorants also compete with pelagic cormorants 
for nesting habitat (Hobson, 1997). 
The combined biomass of cormorants for all three models was derived from the Beringean Seabird Catalog 
colony counts multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert abundance to biomass estimates 
(Appendix B Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). All three cormorant species listed above 
are found in the EBS and GOA model areas, but the double crested cormorant was absent from the AI model area. In 
the EBS, estimated biomass density of cormorants is 1.5E-4 t/km
2; in the AI, biomass density was estimated at 
1.07E-3 t/km2. In the GOA, biomass density was estimated at 3.5E-4 t/km2 . 
134
 
 
    
 
   
  
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
    
  
    
     
   
  
    
  
  
    
   
  
   
  
     
  
      
 
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
    
 
 
  
    
 
   
 
P/B was estimated at 0.159, from survival rates measured in Alaska (Schreiber and Burger, 2002), and QB was 
estimated at 73, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000). In all three models, cormorant diets were estimated to be 
dominated by sand lance (42-50% of diet), with capelin, juvenile herring, and other managed forage fish next in 
importance depending on the system.  
The data pedigree for cormorant biomass is 4 in all models (direct estimate with high variation). Cormorant P/B and 
Q/B estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were rated 6 (mix of 
species across regions). 
Similar to other seabird groups, the majority of cormorant mortality in all models is unexplained, reflecting their 
position as apex predators in all systems. Fulmars account for the majority of predation mortality the AI and EBS 
while Steller sea lions cause the majority of cormorant predation mortality in the GOA, based on a very low 
proportion of the diet preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups. Small amounts of mortality (<3%) 
are attributable to fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems. 
Gulls (Laridae, genus Larus) include many species worldwide, but are dominated by a single species in Alaska, the 
glaucous winged gull (Larus glaucescens). Another species, the mew gull (L. canus) is found in the Gulf of Alaska 
but is far less abundant. The glaucous winged gull generally nests at high densities in large or small colonies on off­
shore islands, although it has recently begun nesting on roofs of waterfront buildings. It is an abundant resident 
along the northwestern coast of North America; bold and omnivorous, it is a familiar sight in coastal cities and 
towns. Although generally an inshore species, it does venture away from the coast where it is often seen around 
fishing vessels at sea. This species has steadily increased in numbers in the last few decades, particularly around 
urban centers, mainly owing to environmental changes and to the availability of garbage and fish offal. It feeds by 
seizing food from the water surface or just below it in flight or while swimming; it also plunges from a floating 
position, by jumping into the air, to become partially or totally submerged. Chit and limpets are pulled off rocks 
during ebbing tides while they are still submerged, and barnacles are grasped and broken off. Fish are obtained when 
stranded in tide pools, in shallow water along the shore, or when they come near the surface off shore. Gulls are 
known for stealing food from both members of its own species, and others, and for killing and eating its own 
species’ chicks, and those of other birds. Glaucous winged gulls rarely live beyond 15 years, and the average life 
expectancy is 9.5 years, with breeding starting at age 4 (Verbeek, 1993).  
The combined biomass of gulls for all three models was derived from the Beringean Seabird Catalog colony 
counts multiplied by the average weight for each species to convert abundance to biomass estimates (Appendix B 
Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). Different gull species are present in the different 
model areas: In the AI, only the glaucous-winged gull was present; in the GOA the glaucous-winged and mew gulls 
were present; in the EBS, glaucous-winged gulls, mew gulls, herring gulls, glaucous gulls, and Sabine’s gull were 
present. In the EBS, estimated biomass density of gulls is 1.0E-4 t/km
2; in the AI, biomass density was estimated at 
5.8E-4 t/km2. In the GOA, biomass density was estimated at 5.7E-4 t/km2 , 
P/B was estimated at 0.166, from order-level survival rates measured in Alaska (Schreiber and Burger, 2002), 
and QB was estimated at 73, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000). The diet compositions estimated for gulls showed similar prey in 
each ecosystem, with different rankings: capelin (54%) and sand lance (19%) dominated in the GOA, sand lance 
(47%) and other managed forage (19%) were prevalent in the EBS, and other managed forage (21%), sand lance 
(20%), and capelin (19%) were the top prey in the AI. 
The data pedigree for gull biomass is 4 in all models (direct estimate with high variation). Gull P/B and Q/B 
estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were rated 6 (mix of species 
across regions). 
Similar to other seabird groups, the majority of gull mortality in all models is unexplained, reflecting their position 
as apex predators in all systems. Fulmars account for the majority of predation mortality in the AI and EBS while 
Steller sea lions cause the majority of gull predation mortality in the GOA, based on a very low proportion of the 
diet preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups. Small amounts of mortality (<3%) are attributable to 
fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems.  
135
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
   
   
  
   
 
   
  
 
     
 
  
  
  
  
 
   
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
Albatross and Jaegers is a composite seabird group containing all species of albatross (Diomedeidae, genus 
Phoebastria) and jaegers (Laridae, genus Stercorarius). Three species of albatross forage (but none breed) in 
Alaska: short-tailed, Laysan and black-footed albatross. Short-tailed albatross (Phoebastria albatrus) is the largest 
seabird in the North Pacific. Historically millions of birds nested in the western North Pacific, but now only two 
breeding colonies remain active: Torishima Island and Minami-kojima Island. Short-tailed albatross live up to 40 
years and begin breeding at about 7 or 8 years of age. During the late 1800s and early 1900s, feather hunters killed 
an estimated five million and the species became nearly extinct. The world population is now about 1,200 birds, and 
is listed as Endangered under ESA; hence bycatch in Alaskan longline fisheries is of great concern. Black-footed 
albatross (Phoebastria nigripes) are the most common albatross in the North Pacific, and range into the Gulf of 
Alaska and the Bering Sea during summer. They feed mainly during the day by seizing prey at the surface. Flying-
fish eggs are the principal component of the diet, followed by squid and crustacea. Some 50,000 pairs of Black-
footed albatross nest in the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands (Whittow, 1993a). Laysan albatross ( Phoebastria 
immutabilis) are seen regularly in Gulf of Alaska during spring and in the southern Bering Sea in summer. Birds are 
farther north in summer than during the breeding season, and nonbreeders concentrate near the Aleutians and in the 
Bering Sea. Laysan albatross feed by sitting on the water and seizing prey; they also scavenge natural carrion or 
refuse from ships, but not as extensively as the black-footed albatross. Laysans often feed in flocks with other 
albatross but rarely with other species. Squid make up the bulk of the diet. Fish eggs constitute the largest fraction of 
the “fish” part of the diet, followed by sunfish. Colonies of Laysan albatross nest on Johnston, Wake, and Marcus 
Islands, and on the Izu Islands were decimated by Japanese feather hunters at the turn of the century and have never 
recovered. Marcus once had an estimated population of one million birds. Midway and Laysan Island populations 
also greatly reduced by feather hunters (on Laysan Island, more than 300,000 birds were killed in 1909 alone) but 
have largely recovered. The Lisianski population has remained depressed apparently because the vegetation was 
altered by introduced rabbits, destroying nesting habitat. Nearly all of the 400,000 breeding pairs nest in the 
Northwestern Hawaiian Islands (Whittow, 1993b).  
The combined biomass of AI albatross and jaegers is estimated at 8.2E-5 t/km
2 , which was derived from an 
estimate of 1500 albatross in that area (Hunt et al. 2000), multiplied by the average weight for each species to 
convert abundance to biomass estimates (Appendix B Table B5). Body weights were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). 
The combined biomass of albatross is poorly known in the EBS and GOA. In the EBS, a density of 1E-4 t/km
2 was 
assumed for albatross and jaegers, and in the GOA albatross and jaeger density was assumed to be the same as the 
density of storm petrels in the GOA, 2.3E-4 t/km
2 . 
P/B was estimated at 0.0676, from order-level survival rates measured in Alaska (Schreiber and Burger, 2002), 
and QB was estimated at 75, from daily energetic requirements (Hunt et al. 2000).  
General diet was also from Hunt et al. (2000). Half of the albatross and jaeger diet in all three ecosystems is 
squid. The remainder of the diet is estimated to come from the forage fish present in each ecosystem in proportion to 
their estimated abundance, so that capelin are ranked next in GOA diet, while juvenile pollock are next in the EBS 
and myctophids are next in the AI albatross and jaeger diet. 
The data pedigree for albatross and jaeger biomass is 6 in all models (historical or single study). Albatross and 
jaeger P/B and Q/B estimates were rated 6 (general life history proxies from literature). Diet compositions were 
rated 6 (mix of species across regions). 
Similar to other seabird groups, the majority of albatross and jaeger mortality in all models is unexplained, reflecting 
their position as apex predators in all systems. Fulmars account for the majority of predation mortality in the AI and 
EBS while Steller sea lions cause the majority of gull predation mortality in the GOA, based on a very low 
proportion of the diet preference (0.16%) distributed among all seabird groups. Generally less than 7% of albatross 
and jaeger mortality is attributable to fishery bycatch in the three ecosystems. 
6.4 Fish (Includes Cephalopods and Forage Fish) 
Pacific sleeper sharks (Somniosus pacificus) are considered common in boreal and temperate regions of shelf and 
slope waters of the north Pacific. Sleeper sharks are found in relatively shallow waters at higher latitudes, and in 
136
 
 
 
    
    
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
  
   
 
 
  
   
  
 
   
   
  
  
   
   
     
 
    
  
   
 
  
  
 
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
deeper habitats in temperate waters. Little biological information is available for Pacific sleeper sharks. Pregnant 
females have not been found, so reproductive mode is unknown, although ovoviviparity is suspected. One individual 
mature female sleeper shark had 300 eggs. Sleeper sharks grow to large sizes; individuals have been measured to 4.3 
m, and lengths to 7 m have been observed under water (Compagno, 1984).  
The EBS sleeper shark biomass is the sum of 1991 shelf survey biomass and 2002 slope survey biomass, as full 
slope survey data were not available prior to 2002. GOA biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS 
bottom trawl survey estimates. AI biomass is 96.45% of the average for years 1991 and 1994 (average estimate of 
1991 and 1994 is 750 t). This is because total biomass for “sleeper sharks” was split between dogfish and sleeper 
sharks, based on the cumulative biomass percentage of each species from 1980-2002 trawl surveys (with 1986 
excluded due to unusually high numbers of sleeper sharks). The total number of sharks reported in the trawl surveys 
is 22 and 33 for dogfish and sleeper sharks respectively with cumulative biomasses of 56.92 kg and 1420.29 kg, 
respectively. 
It seems likely that sleeper sharks display slow growth and relatively low natural mortality rates, so we assumed 
that P/B was 0.1 for this group, and for all other sharks, until better information is available. Likewise, consumption 
rates are unknown, so a Q/B of 3.0 was adapted from a model of an adjacent area, Prince William Sound (Hulbert 
1999).  
Sleeper shark diet composition for the GOA and AI was estimated from 11 animals collected in the GOA during 
1996 (Yang and Page 1999). Diet composition for the EBS was taken from a study conducted in the western Bering 
Sea (Orlov and Moiseev 1999), which showed more pollock and flatfish oriented diets than the GOA data and is 
thus expected to be more representative of the Bering Sea. 
The data pedigree for biomass was considered to be 4 (survey with limited catchability) but downgraded to 5 for the 
EBS and AI as the main deepwater concentrations were not surveyed in the model years. PB and QB values were 
given a pedigree of 7 (general literature review from wide range of species), while diets were given a pedigree of 6 
(species sampled in neighboring regions/limited coverage). 
Sleeper sharks are estimated to have rather high bycatch mortality (accounting for almost 60% of the total mortality) 
in the GOA due to the halibut longline fishery. Bycatch rates for the halibut longline fishery were estimated based 
on the non-halibut species caught during halibut longline surveys. It was necessary to reduce the estimate of sleeper 
shark bycatch from that observed on the halibut longline survey to balance sleeper sharks in the GOA model. While 
biomass estimates from trawl surveys are uncertain for sleeper sharks, the high mortality estimated even after 
reducing mortality from the halibut fishery indicates that further investigation may be necessary to determine 
whether there is a cause for concern. A majority of sleeper shark mortality is also caused by longline fishery bycatch 
in the AI, from the turbot and sablefish longline fisheries; however, the AI sleeper shark biomass estimated by 
surveys may be an underestimate, therefore the bycatch mortality may be an overestimate. In the EBS, sleeper shark 
bycatch mortality appears low; the inclusion of a slope survey biomass estimate here which was not available in the 
AI may account for this difference. The EBS sleeper shark diet is adapted from the western Bering Sea, and is more 
diverse than in other regions. 
Salmon sharks (Lamna ditropis) range in the north Pacific from Japan through the Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska 
to southern California and Baja. They are considered common in coastal littoral and epipelagic waters, both inshore 
and offshore. Like other lamnid sharks, salmon sharks are active and highly mobile, maintaining body temperatures 
well above ambient water temperatures (Anderson and Goldman 2001). Salmon sharks have been both considered a 
nuisance for eating salmon and damaging fishing gear (Macy et al. 1978; Compagno 1984) and investigated as 
potential target species in the Gulf of Alaska (Paust and Smith 1989), altho ugh little was known about their life 
history locally. In the western Pacific, females are estimated mature at 8-10 years and males at 5 years (Tanaka 
1980). The reproductive mode for salmon sharks is ovoviviparous and with uterine cannibalism (Gilmore 1993), and 
litter size in the western North Pacific is up to 5 pups, with a ratio of male to female of 2.2 (Tanaka 1980). 
Maximum size has been reported at 3.0 m, but average size range seems to be between 2.0 and 2.5 m. This species 
lives at least 25 years in the western North Pacific (Tanaka 1980). Salmon sharks have different population 
dynamics in the eastern North Pacific, with maximum ages of 20 years (females) and 17 years (males), and maturing 
at 6 to 9 years (females) and 3 to 5 years (males) (Goldman and Musick 2006).  
137
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
    
    
   
  
     
  
 
 
    
    
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
    
 
  
 
  
   
   
      
  
 
     
 
   
  
  
  
   
  
  
     
 
   
EBS salmon shark biomass was considered to be 0 (trace, not modeled). GOA biomass is the average of 1990 and 
1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. Given that bottom trawl surveys are not efficient at catching large 
pelagic predators, the biomass may be underestimated. AI biomass was estimated by assuming a density of 0.003725 
t/km2 applied to shallow subareas only. Note this is not the density calculated by Ecopath as this last one calculates 
density based on the entire area, which includes the middle and deep strata where they are not really distributed. The 
calculation was as follows: The average minimum stock size of salmon sharks in the North Pacific (NP) during 1989 
was estimated to be 1.92 million individuals (Nagasawa 1998). The mean body weight considered was 103 kg; the 
area of the NP was 26, 542,000 Km
2. Thus, ((1.92*10^6)*0.103)/ 26,542,000 = 0.007451 t/km2. To account for 
migration, density was divided by 2, resulting in 0.003725 t/km2. Because salmon sharks are found mainly in 
shallow waters, mostly 0-100 m (Nagasawa 1998), it was assumed the density would only be applicable to shallow 
strata (but note Campagno 1984 mentions depth range may go down to 150 m). Only two salmon sharks have been 
reported in the AI bottom trawl surveys between 1980 and 2002, probably due to the survey’s poor performance for 
sampling large pelagic predators. 
It seems likely that salmon sharks have a slow growth and relatively low natural mortality rates, so we assumed 
that P/B was 0.1 for this group, and for all other sharks, until better information is available. Likewise, consumption 
rates are unknown, so a Q/B of 6.0 was adapted from a model of an adjacent area, Prince William Sound (Hulbert 
1999). 
Salmon shark diet composition was estimated from 11 animals collected in Prince William Sound during 1998 
(K. Goldman, ADF&G, pers. comm. 2003). The percentage of spiny dogfish in salmon shark diet was lowered from 
7% to 1% in order to balance spiny dogfish; the percentage of squid in salmon shark diet was increased to 7% to 
compensate; the rationale being that spiny dogfish may be more common prey for salmon sharks in Prince William 
Sound relative to the continental shelf of the Gulf of Alaska and Aleutian Islands, where they are likely to encounter 
more squids. 
The data pedigree was for biomass was considered 5 for both GOA and AI, due to limited catchability in surveys. 
PB, QB, and diet data were all from general studies only and were all graded 7. 
Salmon sharks are present only in the AI and GOA models. In the GOA, there appear to be no significant sources of 
mortality for salmon sharks, as there are no natural predators and bycatch appears very low. In the AI, mortality 
caused by the pollock fishery appears quite high, although this may reflect an inadequate biomass estimate as much 
as high bycatch. Salmon sharks eat primarily salmon, sablefish, halibut and squid in the GOA; while identical diet 
data from Prince William Sound (GOA) was used in the AI, actual diets there require further study. 
Spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthius) are small demersal sharks, occupying shelf and upper slope waters from the 
Bering Sea to the Baja Peninsula in the north Pacific, and worldwide in non-tropical waters. They are considered 
more common off the U.S. West Coast and British Columbia than in Alaska (Hart 1980). This species is 
commercially fished worldwide, and may be the most abundant living shark. Complex population structure 
characterizes spiny dogfish stocks in other areas; tagging shows separate migratory stocks that mix seasonally on 
feeding grounds in the UK, and separate stocks in BC and Washington state, both local and migratory, that don't mix 
(Compagno, 1984). Dogfish form large feeding aggregations, with schools often segregated by size, sex, and 
maturity stage. Male dogfish are generally found in shallower water than females, except for pregnant females 
which enter shallow bays to pup. This species is ovoviviparous with small litters of 1-20, and gestation periods of 
18-24 months. While all parameters may vary by population, British Columbia female spiny dogfish are reported to 
mature at 23 years, and males at 14. Maximum age estimates range from 25-30 up to 100 years. Eastern north 
Pacific spiny dogfish stocks grow to a relatively large maximum size of 1.6 m (Compagno, 1984). Directed fisheries 
for spiny dogfish are often selective on larger individuals (mature females), resulting in significant impacts on 
recruitment (Hart 1980; Sosebee 1998).  
Eastern Bering Sea biomass was considered to be 0 (trace, not modeled). Gulf of Alaska biomass is the average of 
1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. The AI original biomass estimate was 3.5% of the 
average “shark” survey biomass for years 1991 and 1994. However this estimate was insufficient to satisfy predation 
by salmon sharks and incidental mortality in fisheries, hence the biomass was doubled. The total biomass for 
“sleeper sharks” (750 t) was split between dogfish and sleeper sharks based on the cumulative biomass percentage of 
each species from 1980-2002 trawl surveys (with 1986 excluded due to unusually high numbers of sleeper sharks). 
138
 
 
   
   
     
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
     
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
    
    
  
  
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
   
 
   
    
   
 
 
The total number of sharks reported in the trawl surveys is 22 and 33 for dogfish and sleeper sharks respectively 
with cumulative biomasses of 56.92 kg and 1,420.29 kg, respectively. 
Stock assessments of Atlantic spiny dogfish use a natural mortality rate of 0.09 (Sosebee 1998), so we assumed 
that P/B was 0.1 for this group, and for all other sharks, until better information is available. Likewise, consumption 
rates are unknown, so a Q/B of 3.0 was adapted from a model of an adjacent area, Prince William Sound (Hulbert 
1999). Spiny dogfish diet compositions are not well studied in the GOA, so diet preference was based on 
information from British Columbia collected in the 1970s (Jones and Geen 1977).  
The data pedigree was for biomass was considered 6 for both GOA and AI, due to extremely limited catchability 
in surveys. PB, QB, and diet data were all from general studies only and were all graded 7. 
Spiny dogfish are present only in the AI and GOA models. The only significant sources of mortality for dogfish are 
salmon sharks, the halibut fishery, and dogfish themselves in the GOA, and salmon sharks, the cod longline fishery, 
and sea lions in the AI, where halibut fishery bycatch is unknown. Still, predation and bycatch mortality account for 
80% or more of total mortality. The percentage of dogfish in both salmon shark diets and halibut fishery bycatch had 
to be reduced in the GOA for balance. Diet compositions used for dogfish are identical between the GOA and AI, 
and was adapted from a 1970’s sampling off the coast of British Columbia. 
Walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) are medium-sized schooling groundfish in the family Gadidae (cod 
family). Pollock range throughout the north Pacific from Japan through the Bering Sea and down the U.S. West 
Coast as far south as California, but their center of abundance is in the Bering Sea (Ianelli et al. 2005). Pollock form 
massive schools over relatively shallow continental shelf habitats throughout their range (Browning 1980). They 
migrate annually between spawning and feeding grounds, with migrations driven by a combination of temperature, 
prey availability, currents, and day length (Kotwicki et al. 2005). Pollock display the relatively high fecundity and 
rapid growth associated with all members of this family of groundfish. Pollock may reach maximum lengths of up to 
1m and ages of 17 years, with fish maturing between 3-6 years and at 40+ cm (Dorn et al. 2003). Though 
historically viewed as an undesirable species for its “soft” flesh quality (Eschmeyer et al. 1983), the development of 
at-sea processing capability eventually made pollock fishing more desirable. Alaskan pollock produced the highest 
single species landings in the United States in 2003 at 35% of total U.S. landings. The Alaskan pollock fishery 
comprised more than two thirds of the tonnage and half the value of the combined Alaskan groundfish fishery 
valued at over $590 million in 2004 (National Marine Fisheries Service, Fisheries Statistics Division, Silver Spring, 
MD; Hiatt 2005). Due to its importance as a forage fish as well as a commercial species, pollock was modeled as 
two functional groups (juveniles and adults) in all three models. The split between juveniles and adults was taken to 
be age 2, which was assumed to correspond to 20 cm for calculating diets. We describe the model parameters for 
each age group separately below. 
Adult pollock 
EBS adult pollock biomass is the 1991 stock assessment estimated biomass for ages 2 through 10+ (Ianelli et al. 
2003). This estimate is approximately equivalent to summing the primary survey biomass estimates for pollock from 
the bottom trawl survey and hydroacoustic survey conducted in the EBS, so was considered to be a better estimate 
than either raw survey alone. GOA adult biomass is the average of 1990-1993 stock assessment estimated biomass 
for age 2 through 10+ (Dorn et al. 2003). Bottom trawl survey estimates of adult Pollock biomass are approximately 
half of those estimated by the stock assessment, which incorporates information from three surveys in addition to the 
bottom trawl survey. Because pollock are a schooling species distributed throughout the water column, bottom trawl 
surveys might underestimate biomass. Because of the apparent high demand on adult pollock in the GOA during the 
early 1990s, a biomass accumulation (BA) term of -1.35 t/km
2 was used to balance the model. This BA is within the 
range of estimated annual declines from the pollock stock assessment (Dorn et al. 2003), although it is greater than 
the maximum annual decline during the 1990s. AI adult biomass is the average of 1991 to 1994 AI stock assessment 
biomass estimates for Age 3+ (Barbeaux et al. 2003). AI Biomass was proportioned according to the percent in trawl 
survey biomass for each subarea. The biomass estimated from the trawl survey was not only about one third that of 
the stock assessment, it also has an opposite trend. So while the AI stock assessment estimates an increase in 
biomass between 1991 and 1994, the AI survey estimates show a decline of about 40% between 1991 and 1994. AI 
Trawl surveys are limited to within the 500 m isobath, thus they exclude midwater pollock and pollock located 
139
 
 
   
   
   
 
  
  
 
   
 
  
 
    
    
 
   
      
 
    
   
  
 
  
  
  
     
  
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
    
   
   
    
 
  
   
   
 
  
offshore from the 500 m isobath. This renders the estimates as an unknown proportion of the total biomass subject to 
annual variability in depth distribution, age composition, and other factors.  
The EBS P/B ratio of 0.67 for adults is derived from the age structure estimated for 1991 in the stock assessment 
(Ianelli et al. 2003), where production equals growth in size plus recruitment for a given year (see Appendix B for 
methods). The GOA P/B ratio of 0.41 for adults is derived from the age structure estimated for 1990-1993 in the 
stock assessment (Dorn et al. 2003), with the additional assumption that the mortality rate for age 2 fish is 0.8 
instead of 0.3, the assumption for all other age classes in the assessment. This adjustment is supported by previous 
multispecies modeling efforts specific to GOA pollock (Hollowed et al. 2000b). The AI adult P/B ratio of 0.37 was 
derived from the estimated age structure for 1991 in the AI stock assessment (Barbeaux et al. 2003). In the EBS, the 
Q/B of 3.17 was estimated using weight at age data fit to a generalized von Bertalanffy growth function (Essington 
et al. 2001) and scaled to the 1991age structure from the stock assessment (Ianelli et al. 2003). In the GOA, the Q/B 
of 3.78 was estimated using the same methods but scaled for the 1990-1993 age structure from the stock assessment 
(Dorn et al. 2003). The AI Q/B of 4.4 was estimated using the same method and scaled to the 1991 age structure 
from the stock assessment (Barbeaux et al. 2003). 
Diet composition for adult pollock was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 bottom trawl 
survey of the EBS shelf, from 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA, and from 1991 and 1994 bottom 
trawl surveys for the AI. 
The adult pollock biomass data pedigree was 1 for the EBS and GOA models (data established and substantial, 
including more than one independent method). This rating was downgraded to 3 for the AI model (proxy with 
known and consistent bias) because the AI stock assessment area and the trawl survey area did not fully overlap. P/B 
and Q/B parameters were rated differently by system: 3 in the EBS model (proxy with known and consistent bias), 4 
in the GOA model (proxy with high variation), and 5 in the AI model (general model specific to area). Diet 
composition data rated 1 in all systems (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales). 
Adult pollock is the only group in all three systems where the survey biomass estimate was not enough to satisfy the 
consumptive demand within the ecosystem, hence assessment biomass estimates were used. The EE in the EBS and 
GOA indicates that adult pollock are fully to over-utilized when predation is also considered, while in the AI almost 
20% of the biomass is “unused” in the system. In the GOA, adult pollock remains out of balance even when using 
the biomass estimates from the stock assessment. A negative biomass accumulation term representing a population 
decline is necessary to balance the model. We found widely different sources of mortality between the systems: the 
fishery dominates in the AI (though pollock still appear “underutilized” there), while fishery mortality is lower than 
cannibalism and cod predation in the EBS but still an important factor, and by contrast fishing mortality is a minor 
source of pollock mortality compared to groundfish predation in the GOA. Specifically, in the AI, the fishery (48%) 
and predation by Pacific cod (13%) account for half of pollock total mortality. In the EBS, it is cannibalism (40%), 
followed by the fishery (13%) and Pacific cod (5%), while in the GOA predators account for 70% of the total 
mortality, arrowtooth flounder (33%), halibut (23%), and cod (16%);the fishery itself is only responsible for 7% of 
the total mortality. 
Juvenile pollock 
In all three models, juvenile pollock were defined as fish less than 20 cm in length, which roughly corresponds to 0 
and 1 year old fish. There is no survey information available to estimate biomass for this age group of pollock in any 
of the systems. In the EBS, and AI, juvenile pollock biomass was estimated assuming an EE of 0.8. This was also 
initially assumed in the GOA, but to make the juvenile pollock biomass estimate more consistent with the stock 
assessment information used for adults, juvenile mortality rates were estimated that resulted in enough production to 
meet system predation demands (based on the initial P/B and top down biomass estimate achieved by assuming EE 
= 0.8, and the resulting biomass was estimated as production / P/B = biomass.  
In the EBS and AI, P/B for juvenile pollock was estimated using the same method described above to estimate adult 
P/B. This resulted in and EBS juvenile pollock P/B of 2.35 and AI juvenile pollock P/B of 1.97. In the GOA an 
initial P/B estimate derived from the age structured stock assessment method described above for adults was used 
first, then modified according based on a top down balance. This estimated juvenile mortality rate was used to adjust 
the P/B ratio to 2.67 for 1990-1993 based on stock assessment age structure and to estimate a juvenile biomass given 
the production demand. (Later adjustments to the model made juvenile EE vary slightly from the 0.8 it is designed to 
be, because juvenile P/B and biomass were not re-adjusted In all three models, we used the same Q/B estimation 
140
 
 
 
    
  
    
 
      
 
 
 
     
 
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
   
   
   
      
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
    
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
     
   
 
methodology as described above for adults. The resulting EBS juvenile pollock Q/B was 5.51, the AI Q/B was 6.96, 
and the GOA Q/B was 6.83.  
Juvenile pollock diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the bottom trawl 
surveys in each ecosystem. The EBS used the 1991 shelf survey data, the GOA used the 1990 and 1993 bottom 
trawl surveys, and the AI used the 1991 and 1994 bottom trawl surveys. 
The juvenile pollock biomass data pedigree was 8 for all three models (no estimate available, top down balance). 
P/B and Q/B parameters were rated differently by system: 4 in the EBS and GOA models (proxy with high 
variation), and 6 in the AI model (general life history proxy). Diet composition data rated 1 in all systems (data 
established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
Juvenile pollock mortality sources differ greatly between systems, with 71% from Atka mackerel in the AI, 40% 
from adult pollock in the EBS, and 47% from arrowtooth flounder in the GOA. In the AI, adult pollock cause less 
than 1% of mortality on juvenile pollock, while adult pollock are second to arrowtooth in the GOA, accounting for 
11% of juvenile pollock mortality. 
Pacific cod (Gadus macrocephalus) is a large predatory groundfish in the family Gadidae which is common in the 
Aleutian Islands, Bering Sea, and Gulf of Alaska, and ranges from the Yellow Sea in China to Santa Monica, CA on 
the U.S. West Coast. Cod are found in both benthic and pelagic habitats from surface waters to depths of 875 m 
(Love et al. 2005). Pacific cod commonly reach lengths over 1 m and live up to 18 years, with females maturing 
between ages 5-7 and about 60-70 cm (Thompson et al. 2003). This one species is responsible for most of the 
diversity of species codes required in the NMFS food habits database, including such delectables as scorpions, 
wood, and cow parts (Bovidae). The first commercial fishery recorded in the American territory of Alaska took 
place in the Shumagin Islands in the Gulf of Alaska, and the target species was Pacific cod. According to the first 
census of American Alaska in 1880, the cod fishery started by 1865, a shore station was established in 1876 at Popof 
Island, and an average of 10 boats per year fished cod in the Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea between 1865 and 1892 
(Mohr 1979). This fishery changed little in character throughout its 85 year duration, remaining on a relatively small 
scale in terms of vessel numbers. However, the fishery shifted over time from its early center the Gulf of Alaska to 
be conducted almost entirely in the Bering Sea after 1915, where the highest landings were taken (Shields 2001). 
Overall the landings from the Gulf of Alaska are estimated to have ranged from 1,000 to 3,000 t a nnually between 
1865 and 1900, increasing to a maximum of 6,800 t in 1906 and remaining in the range of 2,000 to 4,000 t a nnually 
until the fishery shifted to the Bering Sea (where annual catches ranged from 10,000 to 20,000 t at the height of the 
fishery from 1915-1935; Shields 2001, Paulson, WDF&G, pers. comm., 2006). At present, cod support substantial 
and diverse commercial fisheries in Alaska, where they are fished with trawls, longlines, jigs and pot gear. Catch of 
Pacific cod accounted for about 12% of all groundfish catch in Alaska in 2005 (second to pollock at 78% of 
groundfish catch, AFSC website http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/species/catch_value.htm ). 
Adult Pacific cod 
In the EBS model, adult cod biomass is the stock assessment estimated biomass of fish over 20 cm in length from 
1991 (Thompson and Dorn 2005). GOA biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey 
estimates. In the AI adult biomass is the average of 1991 and 1994 estimates from the AI bottom trawl survey. The 
biomass was proportioned across the model subareas according to survey estimates in each one.  
In the EBS, the P/B ratio of 0.41 was estimated from the 1991 age structure in the EBS cod stock assessment 
(Thompson and Dorn 2005),and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom trawl surveys for the EBS (see 
Appendix B for methods). The GOA P/B ratio of 0.42 was estimated using the same methods with the 1990-1993 
age structure in the GOA cod stock assessment (Thompson et al. 2003) and weight at age data collected on NMFS 
bottom trawl surveys. The EBS Q/B ratio of 2.28 and GOA Q/B ratio of 2.19 were estimated using weight at age 
data fit a generalized von Bertalanffy growth function (Essington et al. 2001) and scaled to the 1991 age structure 
from EBS the stock assessment and the 1990-1993 age structure from the GOA stock assessment, respectively. The 
AI model used the P/B ad Q/B ratios estimated for the EBS model.  
Adult cod diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl surveys in each 
ecosystem. The EBS diet was derived from 1991 collections, the GOA diet was derived from the 1990 and 1993 
bottom trawl surveys of the GOA, and in the AI it comes from stomachs collected in 1991 and 1994 as part of the 
bottom trawl surveys. 
141
 
 
  
  
     
 
 
 
   
 
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
   
   
 
    
 
 
  
  
    
     
      
  
 
 
     
  
 
  
  
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
     
The adult cod biomass data pedigree was 2 for all three models (data is a direct estimate from surveys in AI and 
GOA or assessments in EBS but the two sources disagree in these areas). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 
differently by system: 3 in the EBS and GOA models (proxy with known and consistent bias), and 5 in the AI model 
(general model specific to area). Diet composition data rated 1 in all systems (data established and substantial, with 
resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
Pacific cod adult mortality is dominated by fishing in all systems. In the EBS total cod directed fishing represents 
about 35% of the total mortality, in the AI about 33%, and in the GOA, 38%. In contrast, there is no sole predator 
that has even half the same impact on total mortality. In the EBS the most important predator is adult pollock which 
causes 4% of total mortality; Steller sea lions (adult and juvenile jointly) in the AI account for 7% and halibut in the 
GOA, contributes 4%. Cod diets are diverse in all systems, with between 15 and 30% of them comprised by the 
dominant fish in each system (pollock in the EBS and GOA, Atka mackerel in the AI), 10-20% by shrimp, and then 
various benthic groups. 
Juvenile Pacific cod 
In all three models, juvenile cod were defined as fish less than 20 cm in length, which roughly corresponds to 0 and 
1 year old fish. In the EBS and AI models, biomass of juvenile cod was estimated by assuming an EE of 0.80 for the 
group. Biomass in the GOA was first estimated using an EE of 0.8, but then juvenile mortality rates were estimated 
that resulted in enough production to meet system predation demands (based on the initial P/B and top down 
biomass estimate). The juvenile mortality was used to adjust the PB and estimate the biomass given the production 
demand. 
The EBS P/B ratio of 1.08 for juvenile cod was estimated by the same method described above for adult cod. In 
the GOA, the estimated juvenile mortality rate described above was used to estimate a P/B ratio of 2.02 for 1990­
1993 based on stock assessment age structure. In the EBS and GOA, juvenile cod Q/B was estimated using the same 
method as described above for adults, resulting in estimates of 5.58 and 4.59, respectively. The AI model used the 
same P/B and Q/B estimates derived for EBS juvenile cod. 
Diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during NMFS bottom trawl surveys in all 
ecosystems. In the EBS, 1991 data was used, in the GOA, the 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys were used, and in 
the AI, 1991 and 1994 surveys were used. 
The juvenile cod biomass data pedigree was 8 for all three models (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B 
and Q/B parameters were rated differently by system: 4 in the EBS and GOA models (proxy with high variation), 
and 6 in the AI model (general life history proxy). Diet composition data rated 1 in all systems (data established and 
substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
Pacific cod juveniles have diverse sources of mortality between systems, most notably cannibalism by adult cod in 
the AI, which accounts for 48% of the total mortality followed by resident seals (16%) and arrowtooth flounder 
(12%). In the GOA and EBS, cannibalism is not nearly as relevant, as it only contributes 3% to the total mortality in 
the EBS and less than 1% in the GOA. In contrast, in these last two systems, murres contribute the most (~30%) to 
juvenile cod total mortality, followed by the group other sculpins (25%); arrowtooth flounder (19%) are also 
important predators in the GOA. Juvenile cod diets are diverse in all systems, consisting primarily of benthic 
invertebrate groups with some zooplankton. Diets are dominated by benthic amphipods and mysids which comprise 
60-70% of it in the EBS and GOA; but in the AI non-pandalid shrimps are the most common prey, making up 33% 
of the diet as opposed to 17% in the EBS and GOA. Benthic amphipods are consumed in the similar amounts as in 
the EBS and GOA (19%), but mysids are almost absent (<1%); instead polychaetes are about 18% of the diet in the 
AI, a prey item that contributes little in the other two systems (0.5-4%). 
Pacific herring (Clupea pallasi) are small, relatively short-lived fish in the family Clupeidae that range from Japan 
to Baja California in Mexico and north through the Arctic Ocean in Canada. They are pelagic, occupying surface 
waters shallower than 250 m (Love et al. 2005). Herring grow to sizes of 30-40 cm and live up to 8 years, reaching 
maturity at 3-4 years (Hart 1980). They are known for their large spring spawning aggregations in nearshore coastal 
waters, where eggs are laid on submerged aquatic vegetation and milt turns nearby waters white. Spawning occurs 
earlier in the southern portions of the range and as late as July in the EBS. EBS herring are generally larger, longer 
lived, and migrate more extensively than GOA herring, which are genetically distinct stocks (Woodby et al. 2005). 
There is a long history of fishing for herring in Alaska. The first commercial herring venture in Alaska produced oil 
142
 
 
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
    
  
 
     
  
 
 
 
  
 
     
  
   
 
  
 
   
  
   
   
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
    
   
     
 
    
  
    
     
  
and fertilizer from the fish in 1882 at Killisnoo in Southeast Alaska (Macy et al. 1978). By 1906, herring fisheries 
were established in the western Gulf of Alaska at Chignik and the Shumagin Islands, in Prince William Sound by 
1913, in Cook Inlet by 1914, and off Kodiak by 1916. These fisheries produced a variety of products between 1912 
and 1922, but salted herring quickly became a dominant product alongside canned herring after large salteries were 
established in Prince William Sound in 1918 (Macy et al. 1978). During World War I, Alaskan herring was able to 
compete as a food fish, but after war’s end the superior European Atlantic herring products again dominated the 
food market (Browning 1980). After World War I, the Alaskan herring fishery returned to its roots and began 
producing oil, fish meal, and fertilizer from herring. This “reduction” fishery peaked in 1937 with over 100,000 t 
processed by 17 plants, and it accounted for over 90% of all Alaskan herring catch between 1929 and 1966 (Macy et 
al. 1978). Bering sea herring stocks were heavily exploited by Japan and the Soviet Union in the early 1960’s with 
over 200,000 t removed at the fishery peak in 1964 (Murai et al. 1981, Fredin 1985). Herring catches from the 
Alaska peninsula, Kodiak, and Prince William Sound were nonexistent in the early 1960s, and the end of the 
reduction fishery in Southeast Alaska saw declines from over 35,000 t in 1960 to under 2000 t in 1968 (Macy et al. 
1978). However, the fishery was revitalized with a new product for a Japanese market: herring sac-roe and eggs on 
kelp fisheries developed in the late 1960s and 1970s and remain the current major products of the Alaskan herring 
fishery (Macy et al. 1978, OCSEAP 1986, Rigby et al. 1995). Sac-roe fisheries catch herring just prior to spawning, 
while eggs on kelp fisheries harvest spawned eggs sticking to kelp. In some fisheries, herring are captured and put in 
“pounds” or enclosures to spawn within the enclosed area for later harvest of the eggs (Rigby et al. 1995). Gulf of 
Alaska sac-roe herring fishery catch increased from about 300 t in 1969 to nearly 10,000 t by 1975, and to an initial 
peak of nearly 25,000 t in 1981 (Woodby et al. 2005). 
Adult Pacific herring 
In the EBS model, adult herring biomass is the stock assessment estimated biomass of fish over 20 cm in length 
from 1991 (Fred West, ADF&G, pers. comm., 2002). The biomass was proportioned across the model subareas 
according to survey estimates in each one. GOA adult biomass is the average of 1990 through 1993 ADF&G stock 
assessment biomass estimates for Kamishak Bay (Ted Otis ADF&G, 2004 personal communication) and Prince 
William Sound (Steve Moffitt and Rick Merizon ADF&G, 2004 personal communication), proportioned to have 
equal density in all model areas. This assumption of equal density in the GOA was intended to represent the 
dispersal of spawning herring throughout the model area in non-spawning seasons; in addition, there is no better 
information on herring distribution in the GOA. Because of the apparent high demand on GOA Pacific herring in the 
early 1990’s, a biomass accumulation (BA) term of -0.11 t/km
2 was used to balance the model. This rate of decline 
is within the range of herring stock declines estimated for this period from the two GOA Pacific herring stock 
assessments. In the AI model, adult herring biomass was estimated assuming an EE of 0.8 in all model strata.  
In the EBS, the P/B ratio of 0.32 was estimated from the 1991 age structure in the EBS herring stock assessment 
and weight at age data collected by ADF&G (Fred West, ADF&G, pers. comm., 2002) (see Appendix B for 
methods). The EBS Q/B ratio of 3.52 was estimated using weight at age data fit a generalized von Bertalanffy 
growth function (Essington et al. 2001) and scaled to the 1991 age structure from the EBS stock assessment. No age 
structure information was available from GOA stock assessments aside from annual recruitment estimates (Williams 
and Quinn 2000), so the P/B ratio and Q/B ratio were adapted from those estimated using the Pacific herring 
assessment for the Eastern Bering Sea (Fred West, ADF&G, pers. comm., 2002). The GOA herring P/B of 0.4 was 
adjusted upward from the value of 0.32 calculated from the Bering Sea herring stock assessment to account for a 
large 1988 year class recruiting in the GOA during the 1990-1993 model period. The Q/B ratio of 3.52 was 
estimated from the 1990-1993 age structure in the Bering Sea herring stock assessment. EBS production and 
consumption parameters were used for AI adult herring because there is no data on herring for the AI that allows 
any improvements on these estimates. 
Herring diet composition in the EBS was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 EBS 
bottom trawl survey. Diet composition information was unavailable for GOA and AI Pacific herring, so diet 
composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1990-1993 EBS bottom trawl surveys. 
The adult herring biomass data pedigree was 3 for the EBS and GOA models (proxy data from assessed stocks 
applied to entire area which includes unassessed stocks), and 8 for the AI model (top down balance). P/B and Q/B 
parameters were rated differently by system: 3 in the EBS model (proxy with known and consistent bias), and 6 in 
the GOA model (general life history proxy based on information within the region), and 7 in the AI model (general 
and outside the region). Diet composition data rated 4 in the EBS (direct estimate from trawl surveys but with high 
143
 
 
  
 
 
     
  
 
   
  
     
 
   
   
 
 
  
  
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
      
  
  
 
 
  
    
  
  
 
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
      
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
variability due to poor selectivity of herring), and 5 in the GOA and AI models (same species, same time period, 
different area).  
Pacific herring adult mortality is dominated by groundfish predation in all systems, despite directed fishing for 
herring in the EBS and GOA. The most important source of mortality is predation by arrowtooth flounder (30% of 
total mortality) in the GOA, followed by the herring fleet (24%). In the EBS pollock cause the most herring 
mortality (27% ), followed the fishery (11%). Herring are estimated to be “underutilized” in the EBS, with a high 
flow to detritus, especially in comparison to the GOA where it was necessary to add a negative biomass 
accumulation, representing a declining population, to balance the model. There is no herring fishery in the AI, where 
arrowtooth flounder and eelpouts are the dominant sources of mortality, contributing 46% and 20%, respectively. 
Juvenile Pacific herring 
In all three models, juveniles were defined as fish less than 20 cm in length, which roughly corresponds to 0 through 
3 year old herring. In the EBS and AI models, biomass of juvenile herring was estimated by assuming an EE of 0.80 
for the group. In the GOA, the biomass was estimated by assuming that EE was 0.8 for the group, with an initial 
estimate of juvenile P/B. To make this estimate more consistent with the estimated recruitments and adult biomass 
from GOA stock assessments, juvenile mortality rates were estimated that resulted in enough production to meet 
system predation demands (based on the initial P/B and top down biomass estimate). The juvenile mortality was 
used to adjust the PB and estimate the biomass given the production demand. 
The EBS juvenile herring P/B ratio of 2.37 was estimated by the same method described above for adult herring; 
this parameter was also used in the AI model. In the GOA, the juvenile mortality rate estimated by the method 
described above was used to adjust the P/B ratio to 1.42 for 1990-1993 based on stock assessment biomass and 
recruitment. The EBS Q/B ratio of 7.24 for juvenile herring was estimated by the same method described above for 
adult herring; this parameter was also used in the AI model. The GOA juvenile herring Q/B of 4.33 was estimated 
assuming that GOA juvenile herring have the same growth efficiency as EBS juvenile herring (0.327), where age 
structured stock assessment information was sufficient to estimate this parameter.  
Diet composition information for EBS juvenile herring was estimated from food habits collections made during 
early 1990s EBS bottom trawl surveys; however, juvenile herring were collected only in a single trawl survey 
stratum (middle NW). Diet data were unavailable for GOA and AI juvenile Pacific herring, so the EBS diet 
composition was substituted.  
The juvenile herring biomass data pedigree was 8 for all three models (top down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters 
were rated differently by system: 4 in the EBS and GOA models (proxy with high variation and incomplete 
coverage), and 6 in the AI model (general life history proxy). Diet composition data rated 5 in the EBS (direct 
estimate from trawl surveys but with incomplete coverage, downgraded for small sample size), and 6 in the GOA 
and AI models (same species, neighboring region).  
Pacific herring juvenile mortality comes from different predators in each system. In the EBS, pinnipeds are 
responsible for most juvenile herring total mortality (68%), while in the GOA arrowtooth flounder cause more 
mortality than any other source (65%). In the AI, pollock followed by resident seals are responsible for most 
juvenile herring mortality (60% jointly).  
Arrowtooth flounder (Atheresthes stomias) are relatively large, piscivorous flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae 
(right-eyed flounders) which range from Kamchatka, Russia in the Bering Sea through the Gulf of Alaska to Santa 
Barbara, CA on the U.S. West Coast. It is found in benthic habitats from less than 10m to over 1000 m depth (Love 
et al. 2005). Arrowtooth flounder are currently the most abundant groundfish in the GOA (Turnock et al. 2003a). 
They exhibit differential growth by sex, with females reaching a maximum size of 1 m and age of 23, and males 
growing to 54 cm and 20 years. Females reach 50% maturity at 47 cm in the GOA, and display exponentially 
increasing fecundity with length, with large females producing over 2 million eggs annually (Zimmerman 1997). 
Until recently, arrowtooth flounder were not a desirable commercial species because their flesh quality was 
considered poor; however recently developed processing techniques have allowed a moderate commercial fishery to 
develop around Kodiak Island (AFSC website http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/species/Arrowtooth_flounder.php ). 
144
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
 
    
   
   
  
   
     
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
   
   
 
 
    
  
    
  
Adult arrowtooth flounder 
In the EBS model, adult arrowtooth biomass is the NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate from 1991. GOA adult 
biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. In the AI biomass is the 
average of 1991 and 1994 estimates from the AI bottom trawl survey. The biomass was proportioned across the 
subareas according to survey estimates in each one. 
In the EBS, the P/B ratio of 0.18 was estimated from the 1991 age structure in the EBS arrowtooth/Kamchatka 
flounder stock assessment (Wilderbuer and Sample 2003), and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom trawl 
surveys for the EBS (see Appendix B for methods). The EBS Q/B ratio of 1.16 was estimated using weight at age 
data fit a generalized von Bertalanffy growth function (Essington et al. 2001) and scaled to the 1991 age structure 
from the EBS stock assessment. The GOA P/B ratio of 0.26 and Q/B ratio of 1.44 were estimated using the same 
methods as in the EBS from the 1990-1993 age structure in the GOA arrowtooth flounder stock assessment 
(Turnock et al. 2003a) and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom trawl surveys. Values for the AI P/B and 
Q/B ratios of 0.297 and 2.61 were estimated using the age structure for 1991 in the BSAI stock assessment for 
arrowtooth/ Kamchatka flounder (Wilderbuer and Sample 2003), and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom 
trawl surveys for the Gulf of Alaska. 
Adult arrowtooth diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl surveys 
in each ecosystem. The EBS diet was derived from 1991 collections, the GOA diet was derived from the 1990 and 
1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA, and in the AI it comes from stomachs collected in 1991 and 1994 as part of 
the bottom trawl surveys. 
The adult arrowtooth biomass data pedigree was 2 for the EBS and AI models (data is a direct estimate from surveys 
in AI and EBS but the assessment is conducted for the combined area), and 1 for the GOA model (direct estimate 
from surveys which agrees with the GOA assessment). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated differently by system: 3 
in the GOA model (proxy with known and consistent bias), 4 in the EBS model (proxy for combined BSAI with 
some species mixing), and 5 in the AI model (proxy for combined BSAI with some species mixing plus weight at 
age from adjacent area). Diet composition data rated 1 in all systems (data established and substantial, with 
resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
Arrowtooth flounder adults have a significantly higher density in the GOA (5.7 t/km
2) than in either the EBS or AI 
(<1 t/km2). They are preyed upon by pollock, Alaska skates and sleeper sharks which jointly account for 60% of the 
total mortality in the EBS, but have relatively few predators in the AI; sleeper sharks are the only significant ones 
(16% of total mortality). In the GOA, there are no major predators on arrowtooth, as sleeper sharks, cod, pollock and 
cannibalism barely account for 11% of the total mortality. The fisheries in aggregate cause 15%-17% of the 
mortality in the EBS and AI respectively, while only 4% in the GOA. In all three systems adult arrowtooth flounder 
eat primarily pelagic prey. In the GOA they eat mostly capelin (22% of diet) and euphausiids (17%), followed by 
adult pollock (14%), and juvenile pollock (10%). In the EBS, arrowtooth flounder eat primarily juvenile pollock 
(47% of diet), followed by adult pollock (20%) and euphausiids (10%). In the AI, arrowtooth mostly prey on 
myctophids (27%), juvenile Atka mackerel (16%), and pandalid shrimp (16%). 
Juvenile arrowtooth flounder 
In all three models, juveniles were defined as fish less than 20 cm in length, which roughly corresponds to 0 through 
1 year old arrowtooth. In the AI, juvenile arrowtooth biomass is based on an EE of 0.8. In the EBS and GOA 
models, initial attempts at estimating juvenile biomass using top-down methods were not successful because there 
are apparently few predators of juvenile arrowtooth flounder in either ecosystem. Therefore, in the EBS juvenile 
arrowtooth flounder biomass in each model stratum was assumed to be 10% of adult arrowtooth biomass in that 
stratum. In the GOA, we estimated juvenile arrowtooth mortality to be 0.5, a rate comparable to those estimated by 
MSVPA model runs in the EBS (Jurado-Molina 2001). This mortality rate was used to estimate juvenile biomass 
given the numbers and weight at age estimated for those years. 
In the EBS, the P/B ratio of 1.58 was estimated by the same methods as described above for adults. In the GOA, 
the estimated juvenile mortality rate of 0.5 was used to estimate the P/B ratio to 0.90 for 1990-1993 based on stock 
assessment age structure. The juvenile arrowtooth P/B in the AI was estimated using the same method as that 
described above for adults, resulting in a value of 1.01. In all three ecosystems, Q/B ratios were estimated by the 
same method and using the same information as for adults. The EBS juvenile arrowtooth Q/B was therefore 3.31, 
the GOA juvenile arrowtooth Q/B was 2.45, and the AI Q/B ratio was 3.77. 
145
 
 
    
    
  
   
  
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
    
    
   
  
  
   
 
 
  
   
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
    
  
  
   
   
    
 
 
 
 
     
Juvenile arrowtooth flounder diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom 
trawl surveys in each ecosystem. The EBS diet was derived from 1991 collections, the GOA diet was derived from 
the 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA, and in the AI it comes from stomachs collected in 1991 and 
1994 as part of the bottom trawl surveys. 
The juvenile arrowtooth biomass data pedigree was 8 for the EBS and AI models (no estimate available, top down 
balance), and 4 for the GOA (proxy with limited confidence). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated differently by 
system: 4 in the GOA model (proxy with limited confidence), 5 in the EBS model (downgraded from adult rating of 
4), and 6 in the AI model (downgraded from adult rating of 5). Diet composition data rated 1 in all systems (data 
established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
Arrowtooth flounder juveniles have a low fraction of total mortality due to predation in the EBS and GOA, so the 
assumption of an EE=0.8 in the AI model to top down balance this group might be re-examined in revisions to that 
model. The major source of mortality in the EBS and GOA are adult arrowtooth (3-5%, respectively), but they are 
preyed upon mostly by Pacific cod (20%) in the AI. Juvenile arrowtooth flounder appear to eat from different 
sections of the food web in each system. They eat primarily benthic invertebrates (pandalids and benthic amphipods) 
in the AI, show approximately equal feeding from benthic and pelagic groups (non pandalids and juvenile pollock) 
in the EBS, but feed predominantly on pelagic euphausiids and capelin in the GOA. 
Kamchatka flounder (Atheresthes evermanni) are relatively large, piscivorous flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae 
(right-eyed flounders) which range from the northern Japan Sea through the western Bering Sea and Aleutian 
Islands into the far western Gulf of Alaska. They are found in benthic habitats from 25 m to 1,200 m depth (Love et 
al. 2005). Because it is extremely rare in the Gulf of Alaska, the Kamchatka flounder is not modeled there and is 
only included in the EBS and AI models. The Kamchatka flounder bears a strong resemblance to the arrowtooth 
flounder, but is less well studied in Alaskan waters. The stock assessment for arrowtooth flounder also includes 
Kamchatka flounder due to its spatial coverage and the inability to separate catch histories for these species 
historically (Wilderbuer and Sample 2003). Therefore, there is unavoidably considerable parameter overlap between 
these two species in the EBS and AI ecosystem models.  
Adult Kamchatka flounder 
In the EBS model, adult Kamchatka flounder biomass is based on the 2002 estimate from the NMFS EBS bottom 
trawl survey to ensure correct identification of this species. In the AI model, adult biomass is the average of 1991 
and 1994 estimates from the AI bottom trawl survey. The biomass was proportioned across the subareas according 
to survey estimates in each one.  
The P/B and Q/B ratios for EBS and AI Kamchatka flounder are identical to those calculated for arrowtooth 
flounder in each area because the stock assessment makes no distinction between the species. Therefore, the EBS 
P/B ratio of 0.18 was estimated from the 1991 age structure in the EBS arrowtooth/Kamchatka flounder stock 
assessment (Wilderbuer and Sample 2003), and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom trawl surveys for the 
EBS (see Appendix B for methods). The EBS Q/B ratio of 1.16 was estimated using weight at age data fit a 
generalized von Bertalanffy growth function (Essington et al. 2001) and scaled to the 1991 age structure from the 
EBS stock assessment. The AI P/B and Q/B of 0.297 and 2.61 were estimated using the age structure for 1991 in the 
BSAI stock assessment for arrowtooth/ Kamchatka flounder (Wilderbuer and Sample 2003), and weight at age data 
collected on NMFS bottom trawl surveys for the Gulf of Alaska.  
Adult Kamchatka flounder diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl 
surveys in each ecosystem. The EBS diet was derived from 1991 collections, the AI diet was based on stomachs 
collects in the AI during 1991 and 1994 as part of NMFS bottom trawl surveys. 
The adult Kamchatka flounder biomass data pedigree was 3 for the EBS and AI models (proxy with a known bias 
due to species identification problems). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 5 in the both models (proxy for 
combined BSAI with some species mixing plus weight at age from adjacent area). Diet composition data rated 2 in 
both systems (direct estimate with poor subregional resolution).  
Adult Kamchatka flounder goes “unutilized” within both systems as the model explains less than 1% of the total 
mortality in either of them. In the EBS, adult Kamchatka flounder rely on pollock as prey, as 80% of their diet is a 
mix of adult and juvenile pollock while in the AI there seems to be a switch to myctophids which make up over 90% 
of their diet. 
146
 
 
    
 
 
  
   
      
 
    
 
 
    
  
  
 
 
      
   
  
  
   
 
   
 
  
    
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
   
  
  
  
    
  
  
   
  
  
    
 
 
Juvenile Kamchatka flounder 
In both the EBS and AI models, juvenile Kamchatka flounder are defined as fish no longer than 20 cm which 
corresponds approximately to ages 0 and 1. In the EBS, the biomass was assumed to be 10% of adult Kamchatka 
flounder biomass in each survey stratum. In the AI, the estimated juvenile biomass is based on top down balance 
with an EE 0f 0.8.  
In the EBS and AI, the juvenile Kamchatka P/B ratios of were estimated by the same methods as described above 
for adults, resulting in values of 1.58 and 1.01, respectively. In both ecosystems, Q/B ratios were estimated by the 
same method and using the same information as for adults. The EBS juvenile Kamchatka flounder Q/B was 
therefore 3.31, and the AI Q/B ratio was 3.77. 
The EBS juvenile Kamchatka flounder diet was estimated from food habits sampling conducted aboard NMFS 
trawl surveys in the EBS. In the AI, no Kamchatka flounder juveniles were sampled for stomach contents; the diet 
composition was assumed to be the same as that of arrowtooth flounder juveniles sampled in the AI during 1991 and 
1994 as part of NMFS bottom trawl surveys. 
The juvenile Kamchatka flounder biomass data pedigree was 8 for the EBS and AI models (no estimate available, 
top down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 in the both models (downgraded from adult rating of 5). 
Diet composition data rated 2 in the EBS (direct estimate with poor subregional resolution), and 6 in the AI (similar 
species in same region).  
Juvenile Kamchatka flounder have no significant sources of mortality in the EBS, sleeper sharks being their main 
predator causing 11% of the total mortality. The juveniles are however preyed upon heavily by adult halibut (46% of 
total mortality) and Atka mackerel (32%) in the AI (but are top down balanced with an EE=0.80, so the same caveat 
applies here as that described above for juvenile arrowtooth flounder). Juveniles prey mostly on pollock and non­
pandalid shrimp (both make up 80% of diet) in the EBS. 
Greenland turbot (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides; also called Greenland halibut) are large predatory flatfish in the 
family Pleuronectidae which range from the North Atlantic through the Arctic Ocean to the North Pacific. Within 
the North Pacific, they are found from the Sea of Japan to northern Baja California in Mexico, but they are most 
common in the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands. Because it is extremely rare in the Gulf of Alaska, the Greenland 
turbot is not modeled there and is only included in the EBS and AI models. Greenland turbot are benthic fish found 
in depths ranging from 14 m to 2,000 m (Love et al. 2005). Adults inhabit deeper continental slope waters, while 
juveniles up to ages 3 or 4 years are found in shallower continental shelf waters; all turbot move to shallower parts 
of their habitat in spring and summer and return to deeper portions of their habitat during fall and winter (Love 
1996, Ianelli et al. 2006). Greenland turbot reach a maximum size of 1.3 m and a maximum age of over 30 years 
(Love et al. 2005, Gregg et al. 2006). Greenland turbot are a valuable commercial species in the EBS; peak catches 
between 1972 and 1976 ranged from 63,000 t to 78,000 t, but declined throughout the 1980s to less than 10,000 t 
annually in the 1990s, and less than 5,000 t since 2004 (Ianelli et al. 2006).  
Adult Greenland turbot 
Adult Greenland turbot biomass in the EBS model is age 1+ biomass for 1991 as estimated in the stock assessment 
(Ianelli et al. 2002). Adult biomass in the AI is the average of 1991 and 1994 AI biomass estimates from the AI 
bottom trawl survey. The biomass was proportioned across the subareas according to survey estimates in each one. 
In both the EBS and AI, the P/B and Q/B ratios of 0.18 and 1.16, respectively, were assumed to be the same as 
those estimated for arrowtooth flounder in the BSAI region. These values were chosen to maintain consistency 
among the ecosystem models for the Alaska regions in data-poor situations. Alternatively, one could use the values 
estimated for the arrowtooth flounder in the AI. The values for the AI arrowtooth flounder are higher, and we chose 
to assume the Greenland turbot had lower production and consumption values than the arrowtooth flounder given its 
lower abundance in the AI. 
The diet composition was based on stomachs collected in the EBS during the 1991 survey and in the AI during 
1991 and 1994 as part of the bottom trawl surveys. 
The adult Greenland turbot biomass data pedigree was 2 for the EBS and AI models (direct regional estimate with 
poor subregional resolution). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 5 in the both models (proxy for combined BSAI 
with some species mixing plus weight at age from adjacent area). Diet composition data rated 1 in both systems 
(data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
147
 
 
  
  
  
 
    
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
    
    
 
 
 
  
  
      
  
  
  
 
  
      
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
   
 
    
 
Adult Greenland turbot total mortality is almost exclusively accounted for (97%) by the fisheries in the AI, whereas 
in the EBS adult mortality is caused by pollock (30%), then sleeper sharks (11%), then fisheries (turbot trawl, 
flatfish trawl, turbot hook and line) which jointly account for 12% of the mortality (in descending order). Adult 
Greenland turbot eat primarily squids (30%) and pollock (adult and juvenile, 30% of diet) in the EBS and 
myctophids (50%) and squid (30%) in the AI. 
Juvenile Greenland turbot 
Juvenile Greenland turbot are defined as fish no longer than 20 cm which corresponds approximately to ages 0 
and 1. In the EBS, the juvenile biomass was assumed to be 10% of adult Greenland turbot biomass in each survey 
stratum. Juvenile Greenland turbot have not been found during trawl surveys of the AI. Rather than estimating 
biomass assuming an EE of 0.8 in the AI, a biomass of 1 ton was assumed in each area, giving a total biomass of 9 t. 
Assuming a value of 0.8 for the EE gives a biomass estimate of less than 0.3 t. 
In the EBS and AI models, the juvenile P/B and Q/B ratios were estimated using the data and methods described 
above, the values were 1.58 and 3.31 respectively. 
The juvenile turbot diet composition was based on stomachs collected in the EBS during the 1991 survey. No 
Greenland turbot juveniles were sampled in the AI for stomach contents; the diet composition was assumed to be the 
same as that of arrowtooth flounder juveniles sampled in the AI during 1991 and 1994 as part of NMFS bottom 
trawl surveys. 
The juvenile Greenland turbot biomass data pedigree was 8 for the EBS and AI models (no estimate available, top 
down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 in the both models (downgraded from adult rating of 5). Diet 
composition data rated 2 in the EBS (direct estimate with poor subregional resolution), and 6 in the AI (similar 
species in same region).  
There are few significant sources of mortality for juvenile turbot in either model, except for adult pollock in the EBS 
which account for 15% of the total mortality. Juveniles eat almost exclusively euphausiids (>95% of diet) in the 
EBS while a more diverse diet of myctophids, Atka mackerel and pandalid shrimp was assumed for the trace 
juvenile group in the AI. 
Pacific halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis) are very large predatory flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae which range 
from Japan to Baja California in benthic North Pacific habitats from 6 to 1,100 m deep (Love et al. 2005). Halibut 
are one of the largest teleost fishes, growing to 2.7 m and ages of 42 and 55 years for females and males, 
respectively, and maturing at a size of 90 cm – 1 m, or 8 years for males and 12 years for females. During spring and 
summer, adult halibut feed in continental shelf waters less than 200 m depth; they migrate during winter to deeper 
(300 m) spawning grounds, where they release pelagic eggs. Eggs hatch and larvae develop over 6 months until the 
eye migrates over the head and juvenile halibut settle to a benthic life in shallow habitats (IPHC 1998). Pacific 
halibut were first commercially fished in 1888 off British Columbia by a sailing vessel from Maine, the Oscar and 
Hattie, that had made the long trip to the Pacific to participate in the pelagic seal fishery, but arrived too late for the 
fur seal migration. Fishing continued off Washington and British Columbia until populations there were depleted. 
After 1913, the majority of halibut catch was taken in Alaskan waters (Bell 1981). The fishery developed rapidly, 
with coastwide catch declining throughout the 1920s from a peak in 1915. Pacific halibut were first managed by the 
IPHC starting in the 1920s and displayed stock recovery after regulations were applied in the 1930s. Landings had 
reached new heights of 20,000 t annually in the Gulf of Alaska from the 1940s through the 1960s, and reached a 
coastwide peak of 31,752 t in 1962 (IPHC 1998). Catches dropped again during the 1970s, but have since been 
maintained at over 20,000 t in the Gulf of Alaska (the most productive area) throughout much of the 1980s, 1990s, 
and since 2000 (IPHC website http://www.iphc.washington.edu/halcom/commerc/catchbyreg.htm). 
Adult Pacific halibut 
In the EBS model, adult Pacific halibut biomass is the 1991 NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate for the EBS shelf. 
GOA adult biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. In the AI adult 
biomass is the average of 1991 and 1994 biomass estimates from the AI bottom trawl survey. The biomass was 
proportioned across the subareas according to survey estimates in each one. 
Pacific halibut are not formally assessed by the IPHC in the EBS or AI areas, but are assessed in the GOA (IPHC 
Areas 3A and 3B). For all three models, the P/B ratio of 0.19 and Q/B ratio of 1.1 were estimated from the 1990­
148
 
 
 
 
    
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
    
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
 
  
   
  
   
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
   
1993 age structure in the halibut stock assessment for Area 3A (Clark and Hare 2003) and weight at age data 
collected on IPHC longline surveys (and summarized on the IPHC website, 
http://www.iphc.washington.edu/halcom/research/sa/sa.html). Because Pacific halibut weight at age has varied 
significantly over time (Clark et al. 1999), we used weight at age relationships from the early 1990s surveys only to 
estimate parameters for this model. 
Adult Pacific halibut diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl 
surveys in each ecosystem. The EBS diet was derived from 1991 collections, the GOA diet was derived from the 
1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA, and in the AI it comes from stomachs collected in 1991 and 1994 
as part of the bottom trawl surveys. 
The adult Pacific halibut biomass data pedigree was 2 for all three models (direct regional estimate with poor 
subregional resolution). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 3 in the GOA (proxy with known but consistent bias) 
and 5 in the EBS and AI models (general model specific to area). Diet composition data rated 1 in all three systems 
(data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
Halibut adults are true top predators in each system, in that only the fisheries “consume” them. The fisheries account 
for 34% of the total mortality in the GOA, with 29% explained by the halibut fishery alone. In the AI fisheries 
jointly cause 41% of the total mortality; 35% is from the halibut fishery. The EBS bycatch is more of an issue; total 
fisheries mortality is 46% however the halibut fishery accounts only for 20%. The trawl fisheries, primarily that for 
cod and pollock (9% and 6% of total mortality, respectively) account for the rest. In the GOA and EBS, half of the 
halibut diet is adult pollock, in the GOA this is complemented by hermit crabs and miscellaneous crustaceans (20% 
of diet jointly), whereas in the EBS it highly diverse with no other preferred prey. In the AI the diet is comprised by 
squids (22%) and Atka mackerel (15%), followed by octopi and miscellaneous crabs (10% each). While all crabs 
jointly account for 20 and 25%of the diets in the AI and in the GOA respectively, in the EBS they are less than 10% 
of the diet; rather, mixed flat and forage fish contribute small percentages each to their diet. 
Juvenile Pacific halibut 
In all three models, juveniles were defined as fish less than 20 cm in length, which roughly corresponds to 0 through 
1 year old halibut. In the AI, juvenile halibut biomass is based on an EE 0f 0.8. In the EBS and GOA models, initial 
attempts at estimating juvenile biomass using top-down methods were not successful because there are apparently 
few predators of juvenile halibut in either ecosystem. Therefore, in the EBS juvenile halibut biomass in each model 
stratum was assumed to be 10% of adult halibut biomass in that stratum. In the GOA, we estimated juvenile 
mortality to be 0.5, a rate comparable to those estimated by MSVPA model runs in the EBS (Jurado-Molina 2001). 
This estimated juvenile mortality rate was used to estimate juvenile biomass given the numbers and weight at age 
estimated for those years. For comparison with the EBS, the method applied in the GOA resulted in an estimated 
juvenile halibut biomass which was 12% of adult halibut biomass. 
In the GOA, the estimated juvenile mortality rate of 0.5 was used to estimate the P/B ratio to 0.38 for 1990-1993 
based on stock assessment age structure. No data was available for the EBS or the AI, hence the values PB values 
estimated for the GOA were assumed in both models. The GOA juvenile halibut Q/B of 1.42 was estimated by the 
same method and using the same information as for adults and was assumed to be the same for the EBS and the AI 
models.  
Juvenile Pacific halibut diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 
bottom trawl survey of the EBS and the 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. No stomach samples were 
available from the AI, so the juvenile Pacific halibut diet composition was assumed to be the same as for the GOA. 
The juvenile Pacific halibut biomass data pedigree was 4 in the GOA (proxy with limited confidence) and 8 in the 
EBS and AI (no estimate available, top down estimate). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 4 in the GOA (proxy 
with known limited confidence) and 6 in the EBS and AI models (same species in neighboring area). Diet 
composition data rated 1 in the EBS and GOA (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial 
scales), and 6 in the AI (same species in neighboring region).  
Halibut juveniles show similar mortality patterns to other flatfish juveniles across systems. Given the low estimated 
EE for juvenile halibut in the EBS and GOA (0.40), we might in the future assume a value lower than 0.8 to top 
down balance this group in the AI. Predators in the GOA include salmon sharks (32% of total mortality), and in the 
EBS skates (20%) and yellowfin sole (8%). In the AI, Atka mackerel account for the most mortality (35% of total 
mortality), followed by southern rock sole and salmon sharks each of which explain 15% of the total mortality. 
149
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
 
  
     
     
    
  
  
   
   
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
  
   
    
   
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
    
   
  
   
   
  
    
 
    
    
Yellowfin sole (Limanda aspera) are small flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae which range from the Japan Sea to 
Barkley Sound in British Columbia in shallow benthic habitats from 2 to 425 m (Love et al. 2005). Yellowfin sole 
are most common in the EBS in shallow water (<50 m), and they are found only in the Western and Central GOA 
(Turnock et al. 2003b). They reach a maximum size of about 40 cm in the EBS, maturing at about 11 years and 
living over 26 years (Wilderbuer and Nichol 2004a). A large commercial fishery targeting yellowfin sole developed 
in the EBS in 1954, and the stock was rapidly overexploited when Japanese and then Soviet fishing fleets took over 
400,000 t annually between 1959 and 1962. Catches declined during the 1960s and 1970s, but increased again 
during the 1980s, when the fishery transitioned from a foreign fleet to a domestic fleet. Current catches averaged 
78,000 t between 1998-2005 (Wilderbuer and Nichol 2006a). The stock is managed as a one joint stock for the BSAI 
region; yellowfin sole are managed within the shallow water flatfish complex in the GOA. 
Adult yellowfin sole 
In the EBS model adult yellowfin sole biomass was the 1991 EBS bottom trawl survey estimate. In the AI adult 
biomass was estimated by assuming an EE of 0.8. Biomass estimates based on the AI bottom trawl surveys are only 
available for those strata north of Umak and Unalaska (which fall within the EBS model). In the rest of the Aleutians 
biomass is estimated as “zero”, and considered negligible for stock assessment purposes. However, yellowfin sole is 
reported in some diets (sharks and marine mammals) and more importantly, as bycatch in several fisheries in the AI; 
particularly those trawling for “other groundfish”. It was therefore assumed that yellowfin biomass was too low to 
be sampled adequately by the survey. 
This group was not split into adult and juvenile pools in the GOA model due to lack of age structured stock 
assessment information. GOA Biomass for the whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS 
bottom trawl survey estimates. 
The EBS adult yellowfin P/B of 0.174 was estimated from the 1991 age structure in the EBS yellowfin sole stock 
assessment (Wilderbuer and Nichol 2004a), and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom trawl surveys for the 
EBS (see Appendix B for methods). The EBS Q/B ratio of 0.93 was estimated using weight at age data fit a 
generalized von Bertalanffy growth function (Essington et al. 2001) and scaled to the 1991 age structure from EBS 
the stock assessment. The AI P/B and Q/B ratios were assumed to be the same as those estimated for the EBS stock. 
The GOA P/B ratio of 0.2 and Q/B ratio of 2.0 for the entire yellowfin stock (adults and juveniles) were adapted 
from those estimated for the only small flatfish in the GOA with age structured stock assessment information, the 
Flathead sole (see below).  
Yellowfin sole diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 EBS bottom 
trawl survey and 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. AI diets were estimated from stomachs collected 
in the EBS during surveys in 1991. 
The adult yellowfin sole biomass data pedigree was 2 for the EBS and GOA models (direct regional estimate with 
poor subregional resolution), and 8 for the AI model (top down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 3 in 
the EBS (proxy with known but consistent bias), 5 in the AI (general model specific to area), and 6 in the GOA 
(different species, same area). Diet composition data rated 1 in the EBS and GOA (data established and substantial, 
with resolution on multiple spatial scales), and 6 in the AI (same species in neighboring region).  
Mortality sources for adult yellowfin sole are primarily fisheries in the EBS and AI (19% and 79%, respectively, but 
note yellowfin adults were top down balanced assuming an EE of 0.8), whereas large sculpins (10% of total 
mortality) and other groundfish explain most of the mortality in the GOA, where yellowfin are not an important 
commercial species. Yellowfin sole does not appear to be over exploited in the context of the EBS model; despite 
the fact that the fisheries are the main source of mortality, primarily the trawl fishery for yellowfin and small flatfish 
which accounts for 16% of the total mortality. Almost two-thirds of the estimated production is not accounted for 
within the system. Yellowfin sole adult diets from the EBS were used for the AI as well, and these were made up 
predominantly by polychaetes, miscellaneous worms and clams, whereas in the GOA miscellaneous worms are 
absent from their diet. This apparent discrepancy may in part be due to smaller sample sizes in the GOA, but this is 
not certain. 
Juvenile yellowfin sole 
Juvenile yellowfin sole were defined in the EBS and AI models as fish less than 20 cm in length, corresponding to 
ages 0 through 5 years. No juvenile group was defined for the GOA model. Juveniles were kept in the AI model (out 
150
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
   
   
  
 
   
  
 
  
   
 
   
   
    
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
    
     
 
   
    
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
     
    
 
of sheer stupidity) to maintain the same structure as in the EBS model. Juvenile yellowfin sole biomass was assumed 
to be 10% of adult yellowfin sole biomass in each survey stratum for the EBS model. In the AI model, a juvenile 
biomass of 1 ton was assumed in each area, giving a total biomass of 9 t.  
In the EBS, the juvenile yellowfin sole P/B and Q/B ratios of were estimated by the same methods as described 
above for adults, resulting in values of 0.6 and 1.74, respectively. Identical parameters were used in the AI model 
Yellowfin sole diet composition was estimated from food habits data collected aboard trawl surveys of the EBS 
shelf in 1991. Diet composition in the AI was assumed to be the same as in the EBS. 
The juvenile yellowfin sole biomass data pedigree was 8 in the EBS and AI (no estimate available, top down 
estimate). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 4 in the EBS (proxy with known limited confidence) and 6 in the AI 
model (same species in neighboring area). Diet composition data rated 1 in the EBS (data established and 
substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales), and 6 in the AI (same species in neighboring region).  
Yellowfin sole juveniles have few predators in the AI and EBS. The diet was based on EBS collections where they 
consume mainly miscellaneous crustaceans, benthic amphipods and polychaetes (80% of diet).  
Flathead sole (Hippoglossoides elassodon) are relatively small flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae which range 
from the Okhotsk Sea to Monterey Bay, CA, in shallow benthic habitats from intertidal waters to 1,050 m deep 
(Love et al. 2005). Flathead sole grow to a size of 45 cm and a maximum age of 25 years, maturing at 27 cm or age 
8. Growth in the GOA is somewhat faster than in the EBS (Turnock et al. 2003c). Flathead sole are commercially 
important in Alaska, with catches in the BSAI ranging from 14,000 to 20,000 t since 1990 (Stockhausen et al. 2006), 
and GOA catches ranging from 1,000 to 3,000 t (Stockhausen et al. 2005). 
Adult flathead sole 
In the EBS model, adult flathead sole biomass is the 1991 EBS NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate. GOA adult 
biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. AI biomass for adults was 
based on estimates from the AI bottom trawl surveys for 1991 and 1994.  
The EBS adult flathead sole P/B of 0.26 was estimated from the 1991 age structure in the EBS yellowfin sole 
stock assessment (Wilderbuer and Nichol 2004a), and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom trawl surveys 
for the EBS (see Appendix B for methods). The EBS Q/B ratio of 1.97 was estimated using weight at age data fit to 
a generalized von Bertalanffy growth function (Essington et al. 2001) and scaled to the 1991 age structure from EBS 
the stock assessment. The GOA P/B ratio of 0.18 and Q/B ratio of 1.69 were estimated from the 1990-1993 age 
structure in the flathead sole stock assessment (Turnock et al. 2003c) and weight at age data collected on NMFS 
bottom trawl surveys. Flathead sole is managed as one stock for the joint BSAI region so in the AI the Q/B ratio was 
assumed to be the same as in the EBS, 1.97; the P/B was assumed slightly lower at 0.20, as the biomass is less than 
1% of that in the EBS. 
EBS adult flathead sole diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 
bottom trawl survey of the EBS. GOA diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 
1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. AI diets were estimated from stomachs collected during AI 
bottom trawl surveys for 1994 (no data from the 1991 survey were available).  
The adult flathead sole biomass data pedigree was 2 for all three models (direct regional estimate with poor 
subregional resolution). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 3 in the GOA (proxy with known but consistent bias), 4 
in the EBS (proxy with high variation) and 5 in the AI (general model specific to area). Diet composition data was 
rated 1 in all three models (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
Adult flathead sole have relatively low mortality, with flow to detritus dominating total mortality at 60-70% in each 
system. Major predators include cod, halibut, and the fishery in the GOA and AI which account for 20% and 30% of 
the total mortality in each system; but the fishery is the leading cause of mortality in the EBS (10%), followed by 
pollock and cod (7% jointly). In the GOA and EBS juvenile diets seem to switch from being one third euphasiids 
and mysids to shrimp (primarily pandalids in GOA) and brittle stars, as well as juvenile pollock (this last in the EBS 
only), jointly making up 60-70% of the diet. In the AI the sample size is small (<15 stomachs), this may in part 
explain the lack of diversity in this system as non pandalid shrimps (82%) and miscellaneous worms (11%) make up 
most of the diet. 
151
 
 
 
   
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
    
    
     
 
 
  
  
 
 
     
    
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
   
    
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
   
    
   
   
   
 
  
Juvenile flathead sole 
In all three models, juvenile flathead sole were defined as fish less than 20 cm in length, which roughly corresponds 
to ages 0 through 3 years. In the EBS model, juvenile flathead sole biomass was assumed to be 10% of adult 
flathead sole biomass in each survey stratum. GOA biomass for this juvenile group was estimated by assuming that 
EE was 0.8 for the group. In the AI the biomass was estimated assuming all subareas had 1 (one) ton; therefore the 
total biomass was 9 t. 
The EBS juvenile flathead sole P/B of 0.93 and Q/B of 3.13 were estimated by the same method and using the 
same information as for adults. GOA juvenile flathead sole P/B of 1.10 and Q/B of 3.13 were estimated by the same 
method and using the same information as for GOA adults. AI P/B and Q/B ratios were assumed to be the same as in 
the EBS 0.93 and 3.13 respectively. 
EBS juvenile flathead sole diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 
bottom trawl survey of the EBS. GOA diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 
1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. AI diets were estimated from stomachs collected during AI 
bottom trawl surveys for 1994 (no data from the 1991 survey were available).  
The juvenile flathead sole biomass data pedigree was 8 in all three models (no estimate available, top down 
estimate). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 4 in the GOA (proxy with known limited confidence), 5 in the EBS 
(general model specific to area), and 6 in the AI model (same species in neighboring area). Diet composition data 
was rated 1 in all three ecosystems (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales).  
Flathead sole juveniles have virtually no known predators in the AI (EE of 0.009 even with only 9 t in the system), 
and few in the EBS (EE 0.3) such as adult arrowtooth and miscellaneous shallow fish which jointly account for 25% 
of total mortality, besides some cannibalism (3%). In the GOA, flathead juveniles were top down balanced assuming 
an EE of 0.8, consequently predators cause a higher portion of total mortality lead by arrowtooth flounder (28%), 
and followed by other sculpins (24%), adult pollock (13%), and adult cod (11%). As with other flatfish species, the 
available data from the EBS indicates that the flow to detritus is 50%, so again a value for EE lower than the default 
0.8 might be used in future iterations. Predation on juvenile flatfish is an important data gap in these systems right 
now. Diet differences between systems appear to reflect middle shelf versus inner shelf benthic prey distributions in 
the EBS. 
Northern rock sole (Lepidopsetta polyxystra) are small flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae which range from the 
Japan Sea to Puget Sound, WA in shallow benthic habitats from 3 to 517 m deep (Love et al. 2005). This species 
was first described as separate from Southern rock sole by AFSC scientists (Orr and Matarese 2000). The ranges of 
the two species overlap significantly in the Western and Central GOA, but in the EBS nearly all rock soles are 
northern rock soles. The northern rock sole grows to about 43 cm in the GOA and lives over 20 years, maturing at 
33 cm and 7 years of age (Turnock et al. 2003b); a larger maximum size of 69 cm was reported for the EBS (Orr and 
Matarese 2000). This small flatfish is the target of an economically important fishery in the EBS during its spawning 
season in the winter; catches have averaged nearly 50,000 t annually from 1989-2005 (Wilderbuer and Nichol 
2006b). GOA catches of northern rock sole have ranged from 500 to 3000 t between 2001 and 2005 (Turnock et al. 
2005). 
In the EBS, northern rock sole were split into adult and juvenile pools. Adult northern rock sole biomass in the 
EBS is the 1991 NMFS bottom trawl survey biomass estimate for each model stratum. Juveniles were defined as 
fish less than 20 cm in length, corresponding to 0 through 3 year old fish. Juvenile northern rock sole biomass in the 
EBS was assumed to be 10% of the adult biomass in each model stratum. In the GOA and AI models, northern rock 
sole were not split into adult and juvenile pools due to lack of stock assessment information. GOA biomass for the 
whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates for general rock sole, 
proportioned by the ratio of northern rock sole to total rock sole observed in the 1996 GOA trawl survey (the first 
survey where the species were reliably identified separately). As in the GOA, prior to 1997, northern and southern 
rock sole AI biomass was estimated as “general rock sole” in the bottom trawl surveys. Starting 1997 onwards, the 
two species have been addressed separately. The average proportion of northern to southern rock sole in 1997 and 
2000 was used to proportion the biomass of 1991 and 1994 of “general rock sole” biomass. According to these data, 
99% of the rock sole biomass corresponds to northerns. 
152
 
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
    
    
   
   
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
 
    
   
 
  
The EBS adult northern rock sole P/B of 0.232 was estimated from the 1991 age structure in the EBS northern 
rock sole stock assessment (Wilderbuer and Nichol 2004b), and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom trawl 
surveys for the EBS (see Appendix B for methods). The EBS Q/B ratio of 1.14 was estimated using weight at age 
data fit a generalized von Bertalanffy growth function (Essington et al. 2001) and scaled to the 1991 age structure 
from EBS the stock assessment. The EBS juvenile northern rock sole P/B of 0.94 and Q/B of 2.31 were estimated by 
the same method and using the same information as for adults. In the GOA, the whole northern rock sole 
population’s P/B ratio of 0.2 and Q/B ratio of 2.0 were adapted from those estimated for the only small flatfish in the 
GOA with age structured stock assessment information, the Flathead sole (see above). AI values for the entire 
population for the P/B and Q/B ratios were estimated by fitting a von Bertalanffy growth function to data from the 
1991 age structure in the BSAI stock assessment, and weight at age data from the AI, giving P/B and Q/B values of 
0.25 and 1.70, respectively. 
Northern rock sole diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 bottom 
trawl survey of the EBS, and during the 1996 bottom trawl survey of the GOA (the first year where Northern and 
Southern rock sole were identified separately).The AI diet composition was an average from GOA subareas west 
shelf, gully, and slope from the 1996 GOA bottom trawl survey.  
The adult northern rock sole biomass data pedigree was 2 for the EBS model (direct regional estimate with poor 
subregional resolution), while the EBS juvenile rock sole biomass data pedigree was 8 (no estimate available). The 
northern rock sole biomass pedigree was 3 in both the GOA and AI models (proxy with known but consistent bias). 
P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 3 for adults (proxy with known but consistent bias) and 4 for juveniles (proxy 
with high variation) in the EBS, 6 for the whole population in the GOA (similar species in same region), and 5 for 
the whole population in the AI (general model specific to area). Diet composition data for northern rock sole rated 1 
in the EBS and GOA models (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales), and 6 in 
the AI model (same species in neighboring region).  
Northern rock sole show similar patterns across systems to those of yellowfin sole and other flatfish, where the 
amount of mortality due to predation and fishing is relatively low (<40% for GOA and EBS, <10% in AI) compared 
to the unexplained mortality (flow to detritus); this applies to both the adult and juvenile groups in the EBS. 
However it does not mean fisheries have no impact at all, since in the GOA, ~30% of the total mortality is caused by 
fisheries, primarily the flatfish fisheries with trawls and in the EBS 15% of the total mortality (for adults) comes 
from predation by Alaska skate. In terms of diet, in the EBS juveniles feed primarily on polychaetes (54%) and 
benthic amphipods (35%), extending their diet to include sand lance and more miscellaneous worms when they are 
adults. In contrast in the GOA the primary prey items are polychaetes, urchins (jointly 65%) and a variety of benthic 
invertebrates; in the AI diets are a subsample of those in the GOA as they were based on the west GOA where the 
preferred preys are pteropods, snails, and miscellaneous crustaceans (jointly 30%). The diet  appears to include fish 
in a larger proportion as both sand lance and other sculpins comprise 10% of the diet while in the GOA these prey 
are not even 1% of the diet. 
Southern rock sole (Lepidopsetta bilineata) are small flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae which range from the 
Bering Sea to Southern California in shallow benthic habitats from 13 to 339 m deep (Love et al. 2005). This species 
was first described as separate from northern rock sole by AFSC scientists (Orr and Matarese 2000). The ranges of 
the two species overlap significantly in the Western and Central GOA, but in the EBS nearly all rock soles are 
northern rock soles. Therefore, southern rock sole are not modeled in the EBS. In contrast to the northern rock sole 
(see above), the southern rock sole reaches a larger maximum length of about 52 cm in the GOA (max age was not 
reported), and matures at 35 cm or 9 years old (Turnock et al. 2003b). GOA catches of southern rock sole have 
ranged from 1400 to 2400 t between 2001 and 2005 (Turnock et al. 2005). 
This group was not split into adult and juvenile pools in any model due to lack of stock assessment information. 
Biomass for the GOA population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates for 
general rock sole, proportioned by the ratio of southern rock sole to total rock sole observed in the 1996 GOA trawl 
survey (the first survey where the species were reliably identified separately). Prior to 1997, northern & southern 
rock sole AI biomass was estimated as “general rock sole” in the bottom trawl surveys. Starting in 1997, the two 
species have been addressed separately. The average proportion of northern to southern rock sole in 1997 and 2000 
was used to proportion the biomass of 1991 and 1994 of “general rock sole” biomass. The biomass for southern rock 
sole is much lower, ~ 1% that of northerns. 
153
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
     
  
    
  
   
 
 
 
 
     
    
   
    
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
   
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
     
  
   
   
    
   
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
The P/B ratio of 0.2 and Q/B ratio of 2.0 were adapted from those estimated for the only small flatfish in the 
GOA with age structured stock assessment information, the Flathead sole (see above). AI values for the P/B and 
Q/B ratios were estimated by fitting a von Bertalanffy growth function to data from the 1991 age structure in the 
BSAI stock assessment, and weight at age data from the AI. The P/B and Q/B values are 0.25 and 1.70, respectively. 
Southern rock sole diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1996 bottom 
trawl survey of the GOA (the first year where Northern and Southern rock sole were identified separately). The AI 
diet composition was an average from GOA subareas west shelf, gully, and slope from the 1996 GOA bottom trawl 
survey. 
The southern rock sole biomass data pedigree was 3 in both the GOA and AI models (proxy with known but 
consistent bias). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 for the whole population in the GOA and AI (similar species 
in same region and same species in different region), Diet composition data for northern rock sole rated 1 in the 
GOA model (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales), and 6 in the AI model 
(same species in neighboring region).  
Southern rock sole are similar to northern rock sole in the AI and GOA in that predation and fishing explain less 
than 30% of the total mortality. For this group, fishing explains 17% of the total mortality in the GOA; again the 
flatfish trawl fishery contributes a major portion of that at 14% of total mortality. Diets also show a similar pattern 
having the same caveat as northern rock sole: the diets for the AI were based on those from the western GOA. As 
with northern rock sole, fish comprise a larger portion of the diet including other sculpins, sand lance and managed 
forage (jointly 14% of diet); benthic invertebrates prevail in the GOA with polychaetes, benthic amphipods, urchins, 
clams and brittle stars making 70% of the diet versus clams, urchins and benthic amphipods contributing 10% each 
in the AI. 
Alaska plaice (Pleuronectes quadrituberculatus) are relatively small flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae which 
range from the Sea of Japan to southeast Alaska in shallow benthic habitats from 5 m to 1,050 m deep (Love et al. 
2005). Alaska plaice are found in the Western and Central GOA, but their center of abundance is in the EBS with 
only a minor portion in the AI. In the EBS, plaice reach sizes of 46 cm and ages of over 22 years, with maturity 
estimated to occur at ages 8-9. Annual catches of Alaska plaice have generally ranged from 10,000 to 20,000 t in the 
EBS since 1990; the highest catch reported for this species was 61,000 t there in 1988 (Spencer et al. 2004). Alaska 
plaice is reported within the shallow flatfish category in the GOA, where catches have been less than 100 t since 
1991 (Turnock et al. 2005).  
Alaska plaice were not split into adult and juvenile pools in any model. Biomass for the EBS population is the 1991 
NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate. Biomass for the whole GOA population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA 
NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. The AI value for biomass was estimated assuming an EE 0.8; though no 
biomass estimate is available Alaska plaice is a prey item in the diets of several marine mammals, and sharks but 
mostly of adult yellowfin sole 
The GOA P/B ratio of 0.2 and Q/B ratio of 2.0 were adapted from those estimated for the only small flatfish in 
the GOA with age structured stock assessment information, the Flathead sole (see above). Because these values are 
close to those estimated for small flatfish species with more information in the EBS as well, we made a common 
assumption across all models for data poor flatfish species in the EBS, GOA, and AI models. . 
Alaska plaice diet was estimated from food habits collections aboard NMFS bottom trawl surveys in 1991 in the 
EBS. Diet composition information was unavailable for GOA and AI Alaska plaice, so diet composition estimated 
from food habits collections made during the 1990-1993 EBS bottom trawl surveys were substituted. 
The Alaska plaice biomass data pedigree was 2 for the EBS and GOA models (direct regional estimate with poor 
subregional resolution), while the AI biomass data pedigree was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B 
and Q/B parameters were rated 6 for all three models (similar species in same region). Diet composition data for 
northern rock sole rated 1 in the EBS model (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial 
scales), and 6 in the GOA and AI model (same species in neighboring region).  
Alaska plaice have at least 60% of the total mortality unexplained (flow to detritus) in the GOA and EBS; Alaska 
plaice was top down balanced in the AI assuming an EE of 0.8. There is some significant mortality from seals in the 
EBS (35% of total mortality), but only small amounts of groundfish predation apparent in the GOA (7% by large 
154
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
      
  
 
 
   
   
     
   
  
  
 
     
   
  
     
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
    
   
 
   
   
   
     
sculpins). In the AI the main predator is yellowfin sole (76% of total mortality) but note its diet comes from the EBS 
data. Likewise, diet information for the Alaska plaice was only available for the EBS, and thus it was modified for 
the GOA and AI. Polychaetes, clams and miscellaneous worms are the main components of the diet in the EBS 
(80% of diet). 
Dover sole (Microstomus pacificus) are relatively small flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae which range from the 
western Bering Sea to southern Baja California, Mexico in benthic habitats from 2 to 1,372 m deep (Love et al. 
2005). Dover sole grow to over 60 cm and 54 years (Turnock and Amar 2004a), maturing at 44 cm and 12-13 years 
of age (Abookire and Macewicz 2003). This is an important commercial species in Alaska as well as on the U.S. 
West Coast. Prior to 2000, Dover sole catches in the GOA ranged from 2,000 to over 9,000 t annually; however 
recent catches have remained below 1,000 t (Turnock et al. 2005). 
Dover sole were not split into adult and juvenile pools in any model. Biomass for the EBS population is the 1991 
NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate, as supplemented by the 2002 EBS slope survey for deeper strata. GOA 
biomass for the whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, 
except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this relatively deep dwelling species, the 
1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate of total population biomass. AI 
biomass is the average of the 1991 and 1994 AI bottom trawl survey estimates. 
The P/B ratio of 0.2 and Q/B ratio of 2.0 were adapted from those estimated for the only small flatfish in the 
GOA with age structured stock assessment information, the Flathead sole (see above). Because these values are 
close to those estimated for small flatfish species with more information in the EBS as well, we made a common 
assumption across all models for data poor flatfish species in the EBS, GOA, and AI models. However, a stock 
assessment is in development for GOA Dover sole which may allow improvements in these parameters for that area.  
Dover sole diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1990 and 1993 bottom 
trawl surveys of the GOA. Diet composition in the EBS was derived by averaging diet compositions for 
miscellaneous flatfish and rex sole (which occupy similar areas in the EBS to Dover sole). AI was assumed to be the 
average stomach content from samples collected in the GOA west shelf, gully, and slope subareas during 1990 and 
1993 GOA bottom trawl surveys. 
The Dover sole biomass data pedigree was 2 for the EBS and AI models (direct regional estimate with poor 
subregional resolution), while the GOA biomass data pedigree was 3 (proxy with known but consistent bias). P/B 
and Q/B parameters were rated 6 for all three models (similar species in same region). Diet composition data for 
Dover sole rated 2 in the GOA model (direct estimate but limited coverage), and 6 in the EBS and AI model (similar 
species in same region, and same species in neighboring region).  
Dover sole have different mortality sources between ecosystems. In the EBS and AI, they are mostly consumed by 
fisheries and seals; mortality is estimated to be very low in the AI, with over 90% of the flow to detritus, in the EBS 
flow to detritus is about 30%. In the GOA, pollock and the fisheries account for 26% of the total mortality each 
(22% by the flatfish trawl fishery). Diet for the AI comes from the western GOA, and is dominated by benthic 
amphipods and polychaetes (jointly 80% of diet) whereas in the GOA the diet is more diverse, comprised by brittle 
stars, polychaetes and miscellaneous worms (jointly 75% of diet). In contrast, the diet for Dover sole in the EBS is 
based on polychaetes and shrimp (both pandalids and non pandalids) which make up 75% of their diet. 
Rex sole (Glyptocephalus zachirus) are relatively small flatfish in the family Pleuronectidae which range from the 
northern Kuril Islands and western Bering Sea to central Baja California, Mexico in benthic habitats from 0 to 1,145 
m deep (Love et al. 2005). Rex sole reach sizes exceeding 45 cm and a maximum age of 27 years. Size and age at 
maturity are still being studied, but may be 35 cm and 5-6 years (Turnock and Amar 2004b). Rex sole are 
commercially important in Alaska, with catches ranging from 700-2000 t annually in the EBS from 1996 through 
2005 (Wilderbuer et al. 2006) and higher annual catches in the GOA from ~1,000 to 5,874 t since 1990 (Turnock 
and A’mar 2005). 
Rex sole were not split into adult and juvenile pools in any model. Biomass for the EBS population is the 1991 
NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate, as supplemented by the 2002 EBS slope survey for deeper strata. GOA 
biomass for the whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, 
except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this relatively deep dwelling species, the 
155
 
 
   
  
  
  
 
     
  
  
   
  
   
  
    
   
 
 
  
  
 
    
  
  
    
 
 
    
  
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
       
   
  
 
    
  
1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate of total population biomass. AI 
biomass was estimated assuming an EE of 0.8 for balancing purposes; the average of 1991-1994 biomass estimates 
from the AI bottom trawl surveys was not enough to satisfy assumed consumption within the ecosystem. 
The P/B ratio of 0.2 and Q/B ratio of 2.0 were adapted from those estimated for the only small flatfish in the 
GOA with age structured stock assessment information, the Flathead sole (see above). Because these values are 
close to those estimated for small flatfish species with more information in the EBS as well, we made a common 
assumption across all models for data poor flatfish species in the EBS, GOA, and AI models. However, an age 
structured stock assessment is in development for GOA rex sole which may allow improvements in these parameters 
for that area.  
GOA Rex sole diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 bottom trawl 
survey of the EBS and the 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. The AI diet composition was assumed 
to be the average stomach content from samples collected in the GOA west shelf, gully, and slope subareas during 
1990 and 1993 GOA bottom trawl surveys. 
The rex sole biomass data pedigree was 2 for the EBS model (direct regional estimate with poor subregional 
resolution), while the GOA biomass data pedigree was 3 (proxy with known but consistent bias), and the AI biomass 
data pedigree was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 for all three 
models (similar species in same region). Diet composition data for rex sole rated 2 in the EBS and GOA models 
(direct estimate but limited coverage), and 6 in the AI model (similar species in same region, and same species in 
neighboring region). 
Rex sole have different mortality sources between systems, with the longnose skate being the primary predator in 
the GOA (40% of total mortality), cod in the AI, (75% of total mortality, but note rex sole is top down balanced) and 
seals (30%) in the EBS. Overall mortality is lower in the EBS with a larger proportion flowing to detritus (44%) 
than in the GOA (33%). Diet for the AI was based on the western GOA, polychaetes, miscellaneous worms and 
euphasiids make up 85% of the diet in the both the AI and GOA, albeit in different proportions and in the EBS non 
pandalid shrimp contribute 50% of the diet with an additional 30% being comprised by polychaetes and benthic 
amphipods. 
Miscellaneous flatfish is a composite group containing all remaining small flatfish species in each model area. In 
the EBS model, this group primarily includes longhead dab (Limanda proboscidea), Sakhalin sole (Limanda 
sakhalinensis), butter sole (Isopsetta isolepis), and starry flounder (Platichthys stellatus). In the GOA model this 
group includes butter sole, English sole (Parophrys vetulus), sand sole (Psettichthys melanostictus), slender sole 
(Eopsetta exilis), and starry flounder. In the AI, it includes butter sole, starry flounder and English sole. Other, more 
rare flatfish species in Alaska are also included in this group, but have little influence over the composite group 
characteristics due to low biomass. These species include Arctic flounder ( Pleuronectes glacialis), Bering flounder 
(Hippoglossoides robustus), curlfin sole (Pleuronichthys decurrens), deepsea sole (Embassichthys bathybius), 
Pacific sanddab (Citharichthys stigmaeus), petrale sole (Eopsetta jordani), and roughscale sole (Clioderma 
asperrimum). All but one of these small flatfish is in the family Pleuronectidae; the exception is the Pacific sanddab 
which is in the family Paralichthyidae (Love et al. 2005). These species may be retained by commercial fishing 
operations in Alaska, but generally are not the targets of those operations at present.  
This category was not split into adult and juveniles in any model. In the EBS, trawl survey biomass estimates for 
all flatfish in this category were inadequate to meet consumption needs within the ecosystem (primarily due to 
Pacific cod predation), Therefore, the category was top-down balanced using an EE of 0.80. Biomass for the whole 
GOA complex is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. In the AI biomass 
estimates from the AI bottom trawl surveys were only available for English sole in 1994 (~1.9 t). This biomass was 
not enough to satisfy the consumption of miscellaneous flatfish within the ecosystem and was therefore an EE of 0.8 
was used to estimate the final biomass in the model.  
The P/B ratio of 0.2 and Q/B ratio of 2.0 were adapted from those estimated for the only small flatfish in the 
GOA with age structured stock assessment information, the flathead sole (see above). Because these values are close 
to those estimated for small flatfish species with more information in the EBS as well, we made a common 
assumption across all models for data poor flatfish species in the EBS, GOA, and AI models.  
156
 
 
    
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
  
  
   
 
 
     
    
   
   
    
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
   
   
 
 
  
    
 
Miscellaneous flatfish diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1991 bottom 
trawl survey of the EBS and the 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. Diet composition in the AI was 
assumed to be the same as GOA. 
The miscellaneous flatfish biomass data pedigree was 3 for the GOA model (proxy with known but consistent bias), 
and the EBS and AI biomass data pedigree was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B and Q/B 
parameters were rated 6 for all three models (similar species in same region). Diet composition data for 
miscellaneous flatfish rated 2 in the EBS and GOA models (direct estimate but limited coverage), and 6 in the AI 
model (similar species in same region, and same species in neighboring region).  
Miscellaneous flatfish have a majority of mortality is by the fisheries (75% of total mortality) in the AI model. In the 
EBS 33% of the total mortality is caused by fisheries, the rest being caused by predation by seals (20%) and halibut 
(11%). Polychaetes, mysids and non-pandalid shrimp constitute 50% of the diet in the EBS. The diets for the AI 
were based on those for the western GOA, yet the proportion of the prey items is quite distinct: in the GOA 
miscellaneous crustaceans comprise 93% of the diet while in the AI miscellaneous crustaceans are only 30% of the 
diet which is complemented by octopi and brittle stars (23% each). 
Alaska skate (Bathyraja parmifera) is the most common skate on the EBS shelf (and therefore in Alaska as a 
whole), but is relatively uncommon in the GOA. In the AI, the skate now identified as B. parmifera is likely a 
separate species (J. Orr, AFSC, pers. comm., 2004). In the GOA, the maximum observed size of the Alaska skate is 
135 cm (Gaichas et al. 2003). Using an empirical regression method (Frisk et al. 2001), length at maturity would be 
about 96 cm based on that maximum size. At present, there is no age and growth information for any skate species 
in Alaska. Age, growth, and maturity studies of the Alaska skate were initiated in the EBS in 2003, and may provide 
information helpful to management of GOA species in the future.  
EBS biomass is the sum of 1991 shelf survey biomass and 2002 slope survey biomass, as full slope survey data 
were not available prior to 2002. GOA biomass for the whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA 
NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this 
relatively deep dwelling species, the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate 
of total population biomass. AI biomass comes from AI bottom trawl survey estimates for 1991 and 1994. The 
estimates are a combined average of direct biomass estimates and the corresponding proportion of AK skates from 
the total biomass for “unidentified skates”. Bycatch estimates were cut in half because the biomass of skates has 
doubled from 1991-94 to 97-00. Thus we considered the bycatch extrapolated from 1997-2000 to be too high. The 
reduction by half reflects the fact that the biomass of skates was half at the time. 
Frisk et al. (2001) estimated that on average, medium sized (100-199 cm) elasmobranchs have a potential rate of 
population increase around 0.21. We used this as a proxy for Z or P/B = 0.20 for a population at equilibrium, lacking 
other data. A growth efficiency intermediate between sharks and large teleost predators (arrowtooth and halibut) 
seemed a reasonable assumption for skates; we assumed a GE of 0.1, which led to a Q/B estimate of 2.0 for all skate 
species until better information becomes available. These P/B and Q/B values were assumed to be representative 
across Alaskan ecosystem models (AI, GOA, and EBS).  
EBS diets were estimated from the food habits database. Their diet consisted primarily of pollock (40%), 
secondarily small flatfish and eelpouts (16% combined) with the remainder coming from shrimp, crabs, other 
crustaceans, and a range of benthic animals. Food habits information specific to GOA and AI is currently lacking. 
Diet preference for GOA and AI Alaska skates was based on information from the Kuril Islands and Kamchatka 
collected in the early 1990s (Orlov 1998, Orlov 1999). 
Pedigree for biomass in all systems was considered to be 2 (well-sampled by surveys, but downgraded from 1 due 
to species identification issues). PB and QB were considered 7 (general literature review from range of species). 
Diet for EBS was considered 1 (direct sampling with reasonable sample size) while GOA and AI diets were 
considered 6 (measured from same species, but in Russian waters). 
Fisheries are the largest source of explained Alaska skate mortality in the EBS and the GOA (15% and 20%, 
respectively). In all systems unexplained mortality is high, 55% in GOA, 83% in EBS, 92% in the AI. Mortality in 
this last system is caused by sperm and beaked whale predation as well as fisheries. Diet information was available 
for the EBS and AI, but in the GOA Russian diet data had to be substituted. Diet diversity appeared lowest in the AI 
157
 
 
    
   
    
 
   
 
 
 
     
    
     
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
   
  
  
 
  
   
    
   
      
 
  
  
 
   
 
    
   
 
 
     
    
   
   
    
  
 
  
 
with Atka mackerel as the dominating prey comprising 65% of the diet, followed by pollock. The low diversity 
might be partly explained by the low sample size, about 45 stomachs. In the EBS, pollock (40%), northern rock sole, 
and eelpouts (8% each) are the main prey, followed by a variety of other fish and crustaceans. In the GOA, the diet 
was mostly benthic amphipods and Atka mackerel, as well as cephalopods, which together constitute half the skate’s 
diet. 
Bering skate (Bathyraja interrupta) is found in all three Alaskan ecosystems, but may represent several species (J. 
Orr, AFSC, pers. comm., 2004). The Bering skate is the second most common species on the EBS shelf (after 
Alaska skates), where it is distributed on the outer continental shelf and upper slope.  
EBS biomass is the sum of 1991 shelf survey biomass and 2002 slope survey biomass, as full slope survey data 
were not available prior to 2002. GOA biomass for the whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA 
NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this 
relatively deep dwelling species, the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate 
of total population biomass. Bering skates are rare in the AI and were assumed to have a biomass of 0 in this model. 
Frisk et al. (2001) estimated that on average, medium-sized (100-199 cm) elasmobranchs have a potential rate of 
population increase around 0.21. Because little is known about Bathyraja species anywhere, a precautionary 
approach was applied in estimating P/B for this species; it is estimated to be the same as for other skates at 0.20 until 
further information can be collected, although it is possible that these species are slightly more productive than the 
larger Bathyraja and Raja species. A growth efficiency intermediate between sharks and large teleost predators 
(arrowtooth and halibut) seemed a reasonable assumption for skates; we assumed a GE of 0.1, which led to a Q/B 
estimate of 2.0 for all skate species until better information becomes available. 
EBS food habits were estimated from the food habits database, but few fish were collected during the model time 
period. Food habits information specific to GOA skates is currently lacking. Diet preference for Bering skates was 
based on information from the Kuril Islands and Kamchatka collected in the early 1990s (Orlov 1998, Orlov 
1999).The diet composition was derived from one stomach collected in the Eastern Aleutians during the 1995 
bottom trawl survey for AI. 
Biomass pedigree for all regions was considered 3: while surveys sampled the species, their deeper distribution 
had limited coverage by the surveys. PB and QB were considered 7 (general literature review from range of 
species). Diet for EBS and AI were considered 4 (direct sampling but with low sample size) while GOA diet were 
considered 6 (measured from same species, but in Russian waters). 
Bering skates have higher unexplained mortality than predation or fishing mortality in the EBS and AI (90-70%, 
respectively); in the EBS, fisheries explain 25% of the total mortality. In the GOA, 60% of the total mortality is 
caused by the fisheries (37%) and predation by dogfish (10%). The diets are dominated by one main prey item, 
which might be a function of low sample sizes. Main prey are polychaetes and miscellaneous crustaceans in the AI 
(70 and 13%, respectively), benthic amphipods in the GOA (80%), and pollock in the EBS (84%). The diet for the 
GOA was adapted from the Russian diets. 
Aleutian skate (Bathyraja aleutica) is the most common Bathyraja skate species in the GOA and on the EBS slope, 
where is dominant in deeper strata. Despite its common name, it is second in abundance in the Aleutian Islands to 
the whiteblotched skate. In the GOA, the maximum observed size of the Aleutian skate is 150 cm (Gaichas et al. 
2003). Using an empirical regression method (Frisk et al. 2001), length at maturity would be about 107 cm based on 
that maximum size. At present, there is no age and growth information for any skate species in Alaska. 
EBS biomass is the sum of 1991 shelf survey biomass and 2002 slope survey biomass, as full slope survey data 
were not available prior to 2002. GOA biomass for the whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA 
NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this 
relatively deep dwelling species, the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate 
of total population biomass. AI biomass comes from AI bottom trawl survey estimates for 1991 and 1994. The 
estimates are a combined average of direct biomass estimates and the corresponding proportion of AK skates from 
the total biomass for “unidentified skates”. Bycatch estimates were cut in half because the biomass of skates has 
doubled from 1991-94 to 97-00. Thus we considered the bycatch extrapolated from 1997-2000 to be too high. The 
reduction by half reflects the fact that the biomass of skates was half at the time. 
Frisk et al. (2001) estimated that on average, medium sized (100-199 cm) elasmobranchs have a potential rate of 
population increase around 0.21. We used this as a proxy for Z or P/B = 0.20 for a population at equilibrium, lacking 
158
 
 
  
    
  
  
  
 
  
   
    
   
    
     
  
   
 
 
   
  
 
    
 
 
     
    
    
   
    
 
    
 
    
  
  
 
   
  
   
   
  
   
     
   
   
 
other data. A growth efficiency intermediate between sharks and large teleost predators (arrowtooth and halibut) 
seemed a reasonable assumption for skates; we assumed a GE of 0.1, which led to a Q/B estimate of 2.0 for all skate 
species until better information becomes available.  
EBS food habits were estimated from the food habits database, but few fish were collected during the model time 
period. Food habits information specific to GOA skates is currently lacking. Diet preference for Aleutian skates was 
based on information from the Kuril Islands and Kamchatka collected in the early 1990s (Orlov 1998, Orlov 
1999).AI diet composition was estimated from less than 5 stomachs collected in 1994 and 1997during the AI bottom 
trawl survey. 
Biomass pedigree for all regions was considered 3: while surveys sampled the species, their deeper distribution 
had limited coverage by the surveys. PB and QB were considered 7 (general literature review from range of 
species). Diet for EBS and AI were considered 4 (direct sampling but with low sample size) while GOA diet were 
considered 6 (measured from same species, but in Russian waters). 
Aleutian skate mortality is estimated to be primarily from the halibut fishery in the GOA, but we lack accurate 
information on skate species composition in that fishery. In the AI, where we also lack information, halibut fisheries 
were assumed to have no bycatch, so there appears to be less skate mortality in AI. In the AI, skate diets consist of 
pandalid shrimp (60%) and pollock (40%) but note this was based on 3 stomach samples. In the EBS, hermit crabs 
predominate in diets (35%), followed by non-pandalid shrimp (20%) and pollock (16%). In the GOA (Russian data), 
pandalids, squids, and Tanner crabs comprise 50% of the diet. 
Whiteblotched skate (Bathyraja maculata) is most common in the Western AI, the center of this species’ 
abundance. It is also found in the western GOA and on the EBS slope. In the GOA, the maximum observed size of 
the whiteblotched skate is 121 cm (Gaichas et al. 2003). Using an empirical regression method (Frisk et al. 2001), 
length at maturity would be about 86 cm based on that maximum size.  
EBS biomass is the sum of 1991 shelf survey biomass and 2002 slope survey biomass, as full slope survey data 
were not available prior to 2002. GOA biomass for the whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA 
NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this 
relatively deep dwelling species, the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate 
of total population biomass. AI biomass comes from bottom trawl survey estimates for 1991 and 1994. The 
estimates are a combined average of direct biomass estimates and the corresponding proportion of AK skates from 
the total biomass for “unidentified skates”. Bycatch estimates were cut in half because the biomass of skates has 
doubled from 1991-94 to 97-00. Thus, we considered the bycatch extrapolated from 1997-2000 to be too high. The 
reduction by half reflects the fact that the biomass of skates was half at the time. 
At present, there is no age and growth information for any skate species in Alaska. Frisk et al. (2001) estimated 
that on average, medium sized (100-199 cm) elasmobranchs have a potential rate of population increase around 
0.21. We used this as a proxy for Z or P/B = 0.20 for a population at equilibrium, lacking other data. A growth 
efficiency intermediate between sharks and large teleost predators (arrowtooth and halibut) seemed a reasonable 
assumption for skates; we assumed a GE of 0.1, which led to a Q/B estimate of 2.0 for all skate species until better 
information becomes available.  
EBS diets, due to lack of data, were considered to be the same as Aleutian skates sampled in the same region. 
GOA diet preference for whiteblotched skates was based on information from the Kuril Islands and Kamchatka 
collected in the early 1990s (Orlov 1998, Orlov 1999). AI diet composition based on 30 stomachs collected during 
the 1994 and 1997 AI bottom trawl surveys. 
Biomass pedigree for all regions was considered 3: while surveys sampled the species, their deeper distribution 
had limited coverage by the surveys. PB and QB were considered 7 (general literature review from range of 
species). AI diets were considered 4 (direct sampling with low sample size) while EBS and GOA diets were 
considered 6 (measured from same species in different areas, or similar species in same area). 
Approximately 90 % of whiteblotched skate mortality is unexplained in the EBS model. However, in the AI 
whiteblotched skates are the second most common skate and thus the low fisheries mortality might be because there 
was no bycatch incorporated as part of the halibut fishery. Halibut is caught in a much smaller magnitude than in the 
GOA, but still skate mortality might be significant. In the GOA 60% of the total mortality is explained by fishing 
and predation, with fishing causing 40% of it. Whiteblotched skates have relatively how abundance in the GOA, 
however, contributing to the uncertainty in this estimate. The GOA (Russian) diet composition is different from the 
159
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
    
     
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
  
   
  
   
   
  
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
   
   
    
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
AI data, with only ~10% shrimp in the diet but 25% of each squid and benthic amphipods. Based on a sample 32 
stomachs, shrimp, Atka mackerel and pollock make 75% of the diet in the AI. 
Mud skates (Bathyraja taranetzi) are rare in the EBS and the GOA and thus are assumed to have a biomass of 0 in 
both of these models. In the AI, biomass comes from AI bottom trawl survey estimates for 1991 and 1994. The 
estimates are a combined average of direct biomass estimates and the corresponding proportion of Alaska skates 
from the total biomass for “unidentified skates”. Bycatch estimates were cut in half because the biomass of skates 
has doubled from 1991-1994 to 1997-2000. Thus we considered the bycatch extrapolated from 1997-2000 to be too 
high. The reduction by half reflects the fact that the biomass of skates was half at the time. 
At present, there is no age and growth information for any skate species in Alaska. Age, growth, and maturity 
studies of the Alaska skate were initiated in the EBS in 2003, and may provide information helpful to management 
of GOA species in the future. Frisk et al. (2001) estimated that on average, medium sized (100-199 cm) 
elasmobranchs have a potential rate of population increase around 0.21. We used this as a proxy for Z or P/B = 0.20 
for a population at equilibrium, lacking other data. A growth efficiency intermediate between sharks and large 
teleost predators (arrowtooth and halibut) seemed a reasonable assumption for skates; we assumed a GE of 0.1, 
which led to a Q/B estimate of 2.0 for all skate species until better information becomes available. These P/B and 
Q/B values were assumed to be representative across Alaskan ecosystem models (AI, GOA, and EBS), of general 
small flatfish and for lack of better information were extended to skates. Diet composition was estimated from 5 
stomachs collected 1994 as part of the AI bottom trawl surveys. 
Biomass pedigree for all regions was considered 3: while surveys sampled the species, their deeper distribution 
had limited coverage by the surveys. PB and QB were considered 7 (general literature review from range of 
species). AI diets were considered 4 (direct sampling with low sample size). 
Mud skates are found in very low numbers in all three systems (<1,000 t). Twenty percent is the most mortality 
explained in any of the systems; in the EBS it almost all is explained by the fisheries whereas in the GOA most is 
attributable to dogfish (which have equal diet preference for “skates”) and Steller’s sea lions. Diets are high in 
squids in the AI (83%), hermit crabs, non pandalid shrimps and pollock (jointly 65%) and squid, benthic amphipods 
and pandalids (jointly 70%) are preferred according to the GOA (Russian) data.  
Longnose skate (Raja rhina) is one of the most abundant skates in the GOA, and second only to big skates (see 
below) in terms of biomass. Longnose skates were rare in the EBS and AI and thus considered to have a biomass of 
0 in both of these models. 
GOA biomass for the whole population is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey 
estimates. In terms of maximum adult size, the Raja species are larger than the Bathyraja species found in the area. 
Observed sizes for the longnose skate, Raja rhina, are second largest in the GOA at about 165-170 cm (Gaichas et 
al. 2003). Using an empirical regression method (Frisk et al. 2001), length at maturity would be about 119 cm based 
on that maximum size. At present, there is no age and growth information for any skate species in Alaska. The 
longnose skate, Raja rhina, achieves a smaller maximum length of about 1.4 m in California, and matures between 
ages 6 (males) and 9 (females). Maximum age reported for the longnose skate was 13 years, but again the maximum 
estimated size seemed small at 107 cm for females and 95 cm for males (Zeiner and Wolf, 1993). Information on 
fecundity in North Pacific skate species is extremely limited. There are one to seven embryos per egg case in locally 
occurring Raja species (Eschmeyer et al., 1983), but little is known about frequency of breeding or egg deposition 
for any of the local species.  
Frisk et al. (2001) estimated that on average, medium-sized (100-199 cm) elasmobranchs have a potential rate of 
population increase around 0.21. We used this as a proxy for Z or P/B = 0.20 for a population at equilibrium, lacking 
other data. A growth efficiency intermediate between sharks and large teleost predators (arrowtooth and halibut) 
seemed a reasonable assumption for skates; we assumed a GE of 0.1, which led to a Q/B estimate of 2.0 for all skate 
species until better information becomes available.  
Food habits information specific to GOA skates is currently lacking. Diet preference for longnose skates was 
based on information from the U.S. West Coast collected in the early 1980s (Wakefield 1984). 
160
 
 
  
   
 
  
    
      
    
 
 
  
 
      
     
 
 
 
    
  
    
  
  
 
     
  
  
  
 
  
    
  
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
    
    
 
    
  
 
 
  
Biomass pedigree for all regions was considered 3: while surveys sampled the species, their deeper distribution 
had limited coverage by the surveys. PB and QB were considered 7 (general literature review from range of 
species). GOA diets were considered 6 (sampling of same species in different area). 
Longnose skates are found only in the GOA. The explained mortality in the model is 80%. The predominant source 
of explained mortality for longnose skates are the fisheries (60% of total mortality) to which the halibut longline 
fishery contribute half the mortality. The bycatch estimate was based on data from the IPHC surveys. Dogfish and 
Steller sea lions explain most of the predation mortality. At present, there is no direct diet data from the GOA food 
habits collection, so we used information from the West Coast of the United States (Wakefield 1984) to construct 
the diets. 
Big skate (Raja binoculata) is dominant skate in the GOA in terms of biomass. It is a rare visitor to the EBS and AI. 
The big skate is the largest skate in the Gulf of Alaska, with maximum sizes observed over 200 cm in the directed 
fishery, and 192 cm on the survey (Gaichas et al. 2003). Using an empirical regression method (Frisk et al. 2001), 
length at maturity would be about 137 cm based on that maximum size. At present, there is no age and growth 
information for any skate species in Alaska. However, vertebrae were collected from the Gulf of Alaska in 2003 
from commercial fisheries and during ADF&G and NMFS trawl surveys. Until these collections are processed, the 
only age and growth information available is from a study completed off the U.S. West Coast which was limited to a 
size range of skates smaller than that observed off British Columbia (King and McFarlane 2002) or in Alaska. 
According to that study, Californian female big skates mature at 12 years (1.3-1.4 m), and males mature at 7-8 years 
(1-1.1 m), but the maximum sizes estimated were only 170 cm for females and 140 cm for males (Zeiner and Wolf, 
1993). Maximum size from fisheries off California is reported to be 2.4 m, with 1.8 m and 90 kg common (Martin 
and Zorzi, 1993). Information on fecundity in North Pacific skate species is extremely limited. There are one to 
seven embryos per egg case in locally occurring Raja species (Eschmeyer et al., 1983), but little is known about 
frequency of breeding or egg deposition for any of the local species.  
In the EBS, trawl survey biomass was used for the one year, 1996, in which big skates were identified in this 
survey. Big skates were considered absent from the AI. In the GOA, biomass for the whole population is the average 
of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. 
Frisk et al. (2001) estimated that on average, medium sized (100-199 cm) elasmobranchs have a potential rate of 
population increase around 0.21. We used this as a proxy for Z or P/B = 0.20 for a population at equilibrium, lacking 
other data. A growth efficiency intermediate between sharks and large teleost predators (arrowtooth and halibut) 
seemed a reasonable assumption for skates; we assumed a GE of 0.1, which led to a Q/B estimate of 2.0 for all skate 
species until better information becomes available.  
Food habits data from fewer than 3 skates was used to calculate the EBS feeding habits. Food habits information 
specific to GOA skates is currently lacking. Diet preference for big skates was based on information from the U.S. 
West Coast collected in the early 1980s (Wakefield 1984), with the modification that Dungeness crab in the West 
Coast diet was replaced with equal parts sand lance and eelpouts to reflect qualitative personal observations from the 
2003 NMFS GOA trawl survey. 
Biomass pedigree for all regions was considered 3: while surveys sampled the species, their distribution had 
limited coverage by the surveys. PB and QB were considered 7 (general literature review from range of species). 
Diet for EBS and AI were considered 5 (direct sampling but with extremely low sample size) while GOA diet were 
considered 6 (measured from same species, but in Russian waters). 
Big skates are found only in the GOA. The explained mortality in the model is 50%. The predominant source of 
explained mortality for big skates are the fisheries (30% of total mortality) to which the halibut longline fishery 
contribute half the mortality. The bycatch estimate was based on data from the IPHC surveys. Dogfish and Steller 
sea lions explain most of the predation mortality. At present, there is no direct diet data from the GOA food habits 
collection, so we used information from the U.S. West Coast to construct the diets. 
Black Skates were included for comparison purposes to the NCC model, but they are not really found in Alaskan 
waters. This group will probably be omitted in future model updates. 
Sablefish (Anoplopoma fimbria), also known as black cod, range in the north Pacific from central Japan to central 
Baja California, Mexico. Adult sablefish inhabit near-bottom waters deeper than 200 m to depths of 2,740 m, (Love 
161
 
 
  
 
  
   
    
    
  
 
  
  
   
     
  
  
 
 
    
  
  
   
  
  
      
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
  
    
  
   
 
et al. 2005, Hanselman et al. 2006). Juveniles (<20 cm) are pelagic offshore, and arrive at inshore continental shelf 
habitats during the late summer of their first year, where they grow to ~40 cm in another year. They move offshore 
as they grow, arriving at adult continental slope habitat by 4-5 years of age (Hanselman et al. 2006). Sablefish grow 
to a maximum size of over a meter and a maximum age of 94 years, maturing at 57-65 cm or age 5-7 (Love et al. 
2005, Sigler et al. 2004). Sablefish are an extremely valuable commercial species with a long history of exploitation 
in Alaska. Longline halibut fishing in the early 1900s led to incidental and then targeted fishing for sablefish 
throughout the coast by Americans and Canadians. The sablefish fishery remained small, removing an annual 
average of less than 5,000 t from the entire Northeast Pacific between 1915 and Alaskan statehood in 1959 (Low et 
al. 1976). Foreign fleets exploited many fish during the 1960s and 1970s in both the Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska, 
including sablefish (Gusey 1978). Bering Sea sablefish were exploited by the Japanese starting in 1958, and Gulf of 
Alaska sablefish in 1963 (Low et al. 1976, Gusey 1978). Prior to the Japanese fishery, U.S. landings of sablefish in 
Alaska had peaked at 4,090 t during wartime in 1944, but had generally been 1,000 to 2,000 t a nnually. The 
Japanese fishery took similar tonnages until 1968 when landings increased to 17,000 t, and increased further to a 
peak for the North Pacific 38,713 in 1972; the majority of this catch was taken by hook and line, although 5,000­
9,000 t were taken annually by trawl (Low et al. 1976). Catches declined fro 1972 to 1985, then increased to another 
peak in 1988 of 38,000 t. Since the mid-1990’s, catches have stabilized in the range of 14,000 to 18,000 t annually 
throughout Alaska; most catch is taken in the Gulf of Alaska region (Hanselman et al. 2006).  
Adult sablefish 
Biomass for adult sablefish in the EBS is the 1991 NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate, as supplemented by the 
2002 EBS slope survey for deeper strata. GOA adult biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom 
trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this relatively 
deep dwelling species, the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate of total 
population biomass. In the AI, biomass was originally the average of that estimated directly from the AI bottom 
trawl surveys (~6000 t). This abundance was not enough to satisfy consumption within the ecosystem and so it was 
corrected using catch data. Survey estimates were only available for the deep strata going from 200 to 500 m depth. 
However catches come both from deeper areas and shallower areas. The biomass for the deep strata was thus 
increased to account for catches deeper than 500 m and then shallow and middle biomass estimates were added to 
reflect the proportion of catches occurring between depths 0-100 and 100-200 m respectively. This was still not 
enough, but rather than increasing the abundance further, it was assumed that this imbalance was a reflection of the 
reduction in abundance seen in the stock during that period. To balance the model a negative biomass accumulation 
of 0.0329 was added; this rate was based on a linear regression of the biomass estimates of age 4+ between 1990 and 
1996. 
Sablefish are considered a single stock across all regions of Alaska (Sigler et al. 2004). The P/B ratio of 0.19 and 
Q/B ratio of 1.03 were estimated from the 1990-1993 age structure in the sablefish stock assessment, which applies 
to the EBS, AI, and GOA (Sigler et al. 2004) and weight at age data from all regions collected on NMFS bottom 
trawl surveys. 
Diet composition was based on food habits collections made during the 1991 bottom trawl survey of the EBS, and 
the 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. The following adjustments were made to ameliorate 
potentially inadequate sampling in several deeper strata: the percent of pollock and fishery offal in the diet were 
adjusted down and the percentages of squid, jellyfish, and pelagic gelatinous filter feeders in the diet were adjusted 
upward in compensation, because they are the components of sablefish diet in deeper areas where we have limited 
sampling, especially during the early 1990s surveys which did not cover strata deeper than 500 m. The assumption 
that adult sablefish in deeper offshore areas feed primarily on squid and gelatinous prey was verified during the 
2003 GOA survey by personal observations. AI diet composition was based on stomachs from both the AI and the 
west GOA collected during 1990-1994. 
The adult sablefish biomass data pedigree was 2 for the EBS model (direct regional estimate with poor subregional 
resolution), while the GOA and AI biomass data pedigree was 3 (proxy with known but consistent bias). P/B and 
Q/B parameters were rated 5 for all three models (general model specific to area). Diet composition data for adult 
sablefish rated 1 in the EBS model (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales), and 
4 in the GOA and AI models (direct estimate with limited coverage).  
Sablefish adults have substantially different mortality between systems. In the AI, predation and fishing mortality 
overall are very high (94% of total mortality); and there is a negative biomass accumulation of ~0.03,. The sablefish 
fishery accounts for the highest proportion of total mortality (33%, but all fisheries explain 44%), followed by 
arrowtooth and halibut predation (47% jointly). Survey biomass was corrected (scaled up) in the AI to account for 
162
 
 
  
 
  
     
  
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
   
    
  
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
   
   
   
 
    
    
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
  
  
deeper waters that were not surveyed, especially because a portion of the fishery catch comes from deeper waters 
(>500 m). In the GOA the sablefish fishery accounts for only 19% of the total mortality (all fisheries explain 25%), 
with salmon sharks as the highest single predator at 32%, and flow to detritus at 24%. In the EBS 70% of sablefish 
mortality is unexplained, with the highest explained mortality coming from the “turbot trawl” fishery (6% of total 
mortality) which during the early 1990s was allowed to retain sablefish; the fisheries jointly account for 24% of the 
total mortality. Sablefish diets are calculated from stomach samples in the EBS and GOA, and for the AI we used 
West GOA data. In the GOA and AI the diets had to be modified to reduce jellyfish and increase pelagic gelatinous 
filter feeders. In addition, for balance in the GOA the amount of pollock and fishery offal had to be reduced and the 
squids were increased to compensate. This was based on observations from the GOA survey in 2003 where larger 
offshore sablefish were not collected for food habits (this has happened on past surveys as well). Sablefish are 
important predators of rockfish (Other Sebastes) and jellyfish in the GOA, so it should be a high priority to improve 
the spatial coverage of the sampling in order to get a more comprehensive diet composition. At present, it is only 
clear that pollock dominates EBS sablefish diets , followed by other managed forage fish species (together 75% of 
diet), and that a variety of pelagic prey are taken in the AI and GOA. These are primarily pteropods, pelagic 
gelatinous filter feeders and euphasiids in the AI (80% of diet), and euphasiids, tunicates and copepods (75% of 
diet). 
Juvenile sablefish 
In all three models, juveniles were defined as fish less than 20 cm in length, which roughly corresponds to 0 through 
1 year old sablefish which occupy pelagic habitats over the continental shelf. In the EBS, a biomass of 3300 t was 
assumed for the entire area based on an initial top-down balance using an EE of 0.80. The juvenile sablefish EE 
subsequently changed in the EBS due to other data updates, but since there was no new information on biomass this 
initial value was unchanged. In the GOA and AI, biomass for this juvenile group was estimated by assuming that EE 
was 0.8 for the group.  
The juvenile sablefish P/B of 1.65 and Q/B of 3.32 were estimated by the same method and using the same 
information as for adults, and were applied across all three ecosystems.  
 Juvenile sablefish diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during the 1990 and 1993 
bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. Because no juvenile sablefish had been collected during EBS bottom trawl 
surveys, EBS diet compositions were based on this same data and rounded to exclude items estimated to be less than 
1% of GOA diets. AI diet composition was based on stomachs from both the AI and the west GOA. 
The juvenile sablefish biomass data pedigree was 8 for all three models (no estimate available, top down balance). 
P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 for all three models (general model specific to area with higher uncertainty 
due to low sample size of juveniles). Diet composition data for juvenile sablefish rated 6 in the EBS model (same 
species in neighboring region), 4 in the GOA model (direct estimate with limited coverage), and 6 in the AI model 
(limited coverage of correct area with some information from neighboring region). 
Sablefish juveniles have 60%of their total mortality in the EBS explained by predation. Pacific cod account almost 
exclusively for the mortality in the AI as does arrowtooth flounder (65%) and Steller’s sea lions (12%) in the GOA 
and fur seals in EBS. Diets in all systems are based on GOA data, and euphausiids make up at least 50% of the diet 
in all systems. 
Eelpouts (family Zoarcidae) is a composite group which includes representatives of the genera Lycodes, Lycodapes, 
Lycodopsis, Lycenchelys, Bothrocara, and Gymnelis. Eelpouts are a diverse family in the modeled regions; the trawl 
surveys primarily catch the larger Lycodes species, particularly the marbled eelpout (L. raridens), the wattled 
eelpout (L. palearis) and the shortfin eelpout (L. brevipes). Data on smaller eelpout species is limited due to limited 
trawl catchability. Eelpouts are small, narrow, eel-like fishes which are extremely poorly sampled by bottom trawl 
survey gear designed for groundfish. 
Initial attempts to include trawl survey biomass estimates for eelpouts indicated that the consumption of eelpouts 
is approximately four orders of magnitude higher than survey estimated biomass—this result is common to all 
Alaskan models, including a smaller scale model developed for the Pribilof Islands (Cianelli et al. 2004). Therefore, 
eelpout biomass was estimated by assuming that EE was 0.8 for the group in all models. Little is known about 
eelpout life history, but they are assumed to have similar productivity to other groundfish such as pollock, cod, and 
herring, so P/B was set to 0.40 (this was used as the default groundfish P/B if no other information was available). 
163
 
 
    
  
  
   
    
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
  
  
   
  
    
     
  
    
 
   
    
 
  
   
   
  
 
    
   
   
 
   
  
     
 
  
    
 
  
 
   
  
   
 
   
  
   
Default growth efficiency was assumed to be 0.2, so default Q/B was set to 2.0 in the absence of other information 
(again, similar to groundfish such as Pacific cod).  
Diet composition information was unavailable for GOA and AI eelpouts, so diet composition estimated from food 
habits collections made during the EBS bottom trawl surveys were substituted, with the modification that juvenile 
crabs in the EBS diet which have no equivalent in the other models were called miscellaneous crabs. 
Eelpout biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (estimated by Ecopath) while PB and QB were 7 (average values 
across a wide range of groundfish) and diets were 6 (limited data for all species in the category in the EBS, and data 
from adjacent systems for the AI and GOA, but within and the correct time period). 
Eelpout density, as estimated using EE = 0.80 in all systems, is greatest in the EBS, followed by the GOA and 
lowest in the AI. Major predators differ between systems: Atka mackerel and cod are the major predators in the AI 
accounting for 75% of the total mortality; cod, Alaska skates, and cannibalism are high mortality sources in the EBS 
accounting for 40% of the total mortality; and in the GOA eelpouts are eaten primarily by the ubiquitous arrowtooth 
flounder (43%). Diets for eelpouts are identical in all systems as the only available data was from the EBS; the main 
prey items are benthic amphipods, polychaetes and brittle stars which together are about 70% of the eelpout’s diet. 
Giant grenadier (Albatrossia pectoralis) are the most common grenadier in Alaska, and are the largest of all 
macrourid species (Nelson 1994) reaching a maximum size of 150 cm (not including the long, whiplike tail). 
Because grenadiers dominate the biomass in many deep-sea (> 400 m) habitats, they are suspected to play an 
important ecological role in energy transfer, either as pelagic predators, benthic predators, and/or as scavengers on 
detritus (McLellan 1977). According to research in Russian waters, giant grenadiers form sex-specific aggregations 
with females found shallower than males, and they migrate seasonally between shallower and deeper waters 
according to the timing of ovarian maturation and spawning (Novikov 1970, as referenced in Burton 1999). 
Concentrations of giant grenadiers peak during the summer months in Russian waters (Tuponogov 1997, as 
referenced in Burton 1999). Giant grenadier have a pelagic juvenile stage, with settlement to benthic habitats 
thought to coincide with the onset of maturity (Noikov 1970). This life history strategy may protect immature giant 
grenadiers from fishing pressure (Burton 1999). Giant grenadiers are very slow growing species which live at least 
30 to 50 years, maturing at 10-15 years and 50-56 cm TL (Burton 1999). This life history indicates that grenadier 
populations may be more vulnerable to and slower to recover from heavy fishing pressure, similar to rockfish and 
elasmobranch populations. Although there is no target fishery for grenadiers in Alaska at present, bycatch of 
grenadiers in the sablefish fishery has ranged from 11,000 to 20,000 t between 1997 and 2005. Nearly all of this 
catch is discarded (Clausen 2006a).  
EBS biomass was taken from 2002 slope surveys, as slope surveys prior to this time period were incomplete, and 
almost no biomass of grenadiers is found on the continental shelf. GOA biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 
GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. 
For this relatively deep dwelling species, the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better 
estimate of total population biomass. AI biomass was originally based on the averaged 1991 and 1994 AI bottom 
trawl survey estimates. However the biomass was not sufficient to satisfy consumption within the ecosystem: the 
maximum depth of the survey is considerably shallower than the main concentrations of grenadiers in other 
ecosystems. The survey estimate was increased by one order of magnitude based on the information from the 1996 
SAFE Bering Sea Aleutian Islands Chapter 13 (Fritz 1996), in which the biomass of giant grenadiers for 1980, 1983, 
and 1986 were 322,409, 364,110, and 618,102 t, respectively (compared to 28,901 t, the average of 1991-1994 
surveys). Therefore, an estimated 289,010 t of grenadiers were included in the AI model. 
Because there is no direct information to estimate production or consumption rates for this group, we used values 
comparable to those for other relatively low productivity groups, a P/B of 0.15 and a Q/B of 2.0 for all models. 
Diet composition was based on stomachs collected during bottom trawl surveys in all three regions for the same 
years that biomass was estimated.  
Pedigree for biomass was considered 3 for GOA and EBS (survey coverage but limited over depths of main 
concentrations) while AI pedigree was 6 (limited information from surveys). P/B and Q/B pedigree was 7 for all 
ecosystems (average values across a wide range of groundfish). Diet pedigree was 2 in the EBS and GOA, and 3 in 
the AI, with direct sampling although with incomplete depth coverage. 
Giant grenadiers have most of the mortality unexplained by the models for each system, with flow to detritus around 
70% in the GOA, 70% in the EBS, and over 95% in the AI. The largest identified sources of mortality in each 
system are the GOA sablefish fishery (25%), and sleeper sharks in the EBS (22%). Sperm beaked whales are almost 
164
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
   
   
  
  
 
    
   
  
  
 
    
    
  
 
   
  
   
 
   
    
  
 
   
 
    
   
   
  
  
 
    
  
   
 
    
the only predator in the AI. Grenadier catch in the AI sablefish fishery appears to be very low; more so than in other 
areas. Giant grenadier diets are estimated from field data in all systems, but calculated by hand in the AI and EBS 
(so they were not weighted by habitat). They eat squid and non-pandalid shrimp in the EBS (50% each), myctophids 
and squids in the AI (47 and 44%, respectively), and non-pandalid shrimp, octopi and pandalid shrimp in the GOA 
(67, 16 and 11%, respectively). 
Pacific grenadier (Coryphaenoides pacificus) are very slow growing macrourid species which reach a size of 84 cm 
TL and ages as high as 73 years, maturing at 20-40 years and 46-65 cm TL off the U.S. West Coast (Andrews et al. 
1999). This life history indicates that grenadier populations may be more vulnerable to and slower to recover from 
heavy fishing pressure, similar to rockfish and elasmobranch populations. Target fisheries for Pacific grenadier have 
developed along the U.S. West Coast, although they are not yet fished in Alaska and appear low in biomass relative 
to the giant grenadier there (Clausen 2006a).  
EBS biomass was taken from 2002 slope surveys, as slope surveys prior to this time period were incomplete, and 
almost no biomass of grenadiers is found on the continental shelf. GOA biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 
GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. 
For this relatively deep dwelling species, the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better 
estimate of total population biomass. Even our deepest surveys still do not sample deep enough to fully assess all 
three common grenadier species found in the GOA; for example, there are indications that the maximum density of 
Pacific grenadiers occurs around 1500 m depth (Andrews et al. 1999). AI biomass is not believed to be sampled 
adequately. There are indications that the maximum density of Pacific grenadiers occurs around 1500 m depth 
(Andrews et al. 1999), whereas the maximum depth during bottom trawl surveys is 500m. This problem is also 
exemplified with the giant grenadier, above. Therefore, AI Pacific grenadier biomass is based on a top down balance 
with EE = 0.80.  
Because there is no direct information to estimate production or consumption rates for this group, we used values 
comparable to those for other relatively low productivity groups, a P/B of 0.15 and a Q/B of 2.0.  
Pacific grenadier diet composition is unknown in all three ecosystems, so the ecosystem-specific giant grenadier 
diet composition was substituted in all three cases. 
Pedigree for biomass was considered 3 for GOA and EBS (survey coverage but limited over depths of main 
concentrations) while AI pedigree was 6 (limited information from surveys). P/B and Q/B pedigree was 7 for all 
ecosystems (average values across a wide range of groundfish). Diet pedigree was 5 in all systems: it was taken 
from system-specific diet studies of the same family (giant grenadiers).  
Pacific grenadiers and other macrourids have the same diets in all systems as giant grenadiers, because there was no 
information specific to these species. The only sources of explained mortality for Pacific grenadiers are fisheries in 
the GOA (for sablefish primarily) besides sperm beaked whales in a small proportion (part of their diet by 
preference) in all systems. The same is true for other macrourids, with the addition that cod and Pacific ocean perch 
(75% of total mortality) eat them in the AI (but note macrourids were top down balanced assuming an EE of 0.8 in 
this system). 
Other macrourids (family Macrouridae) is a composite group which includes the remaining major grenadier 
species found in Alaska: mostly the popeye grenadier Coryphaenoides cinereus, and an additional 8 species which 
are known from the Pacific Ocean, and may be present in the North Pacific. There is little biological information on 
many species in this group in Alaskan waters.  
EBS biomass was taken from 2002 slope surveys, as slope surveys prior to this time period were incomplete, and 
almost no biomass of grenadiers is found on the continental shelf. Other macrourid biomass is the average of 1990 
and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed 
in 1999. For this relatively deep dwelling group the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a 
better estimate of total population biomass. The AI biomass estimate from the 1991 and 1994 AI trawl surveys was 
for popeye grenadier only, a mere 1.5 t. Thus the biomass was estimated by assuming an EE of 0.8 for balance 
purposes. 
Because there is no direct information to estimate production or consumption rates for this group, we used values 
comparable to those for other relatively low productivity groups, a P/B of 0.15 and a Q/B of 2.0.  
165
 
 
 
   
 
     
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
 
    
   
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
     
  
   
  
 
 
 Other macrourid diet composition is unknown in the three ecosystems, so ecosystem-specific giant grenadier diet 
composition was substituted. 
Pedigree for biomass was considered 3 for GOA and EBS (survey coverage but limited over depths of main 
concentrations) while AI pedigree was 8 (estimated by Ecopath). P/B and Q/B pedigree was 7 for all ecosystems 
(average values across a wide range of groundfish). Diet pedigree was 5 in all systems: it was taken from system-
specific diet studies of the same family (giant grenadiers). 
Miscellaneous fish, deep is a composite group containing a variety of less common deeper-dwelling fishes, 
including dragonfishes and viperfishes (Stomiidae), hatchetfishes (Sternoptychinae), tubesnouts (Aulorhynchidae), 
slickheads (Alepocehpalidae), pearleyes (Scopelarchidae), and bigscale fishes or ridgeheads (Melamphaidae). 
No biomass estimate is available for any of these taxa, so biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 
0.8. Likewise, no information on production or consumption is available for these taxa. Because they are generally 
deep-sea dwellers, the standard P/B ratio was lowered to 0.2 to account for generally lower productivity in this 
habitat. The standard Q/B ratio of 4.0 was applied. The diet was assumed to be mainly squids and shrimp, a 
simplification of the grenadier’s diet. These assumptions were the same in all models, AI, GOA and EBS. 
Pedigree for this group is 8 for biomass (estimated by Ecopath) and 7 for P/B, Q/B, and Diet (general information 
from wide ranging species in similar habitats). 
Miscellaneous fish, deep predation mortality is caused by adult pollock and POP in the AI (respectively 58% and 
10% of the total mortality); fisheries account for 25% of the mortality and POP are also a main predator (48% of 
total mortality) in the GOA, and in the EBS 75% of the mortality is also explained by POP. Diet was the same for all 
systems, half squids and half non pandalid shrimps based on the diet for giant grenadiers in the EBS. 
Pacific ocean perch (Sebastes alutus) are schooling rockfish in the family Scorpaenidae which range from southern 
Japan to central Baja California, Mexico, and are found from surface waters to 825 m depths (Love et al. 2005). 
Pacific ocean perch are relatively small but long-lived fish, reaching a maximum size of 55 cm and ages over 84 
years in the GOA (Orr et al. 1998, Hanselman et al. 2003). The stock is managed as a unit within the BSAI, though 
catches are higher in the AI and historically, higher abundances have been estimated in the western and central 
Aleutians. Pacific ocean perch is still commercially important today in the Gulf of Alaska, but has not recovered to 
pre-1960’s exploitation levels (OCSEAP 1986, Hanselman et al. 2003). With the peak of the Japanese and Soviet 
Pacific ocean perch trawl fishery in 1965, the largest recorded annual removal of any single species in the history of 
the Gulf of Alaska occurred—348,600 t (Ito 1982). (The 1984 peak catch of pollock was second largest in the GOA 
at 307,000 t.) In 1966, Soviet catches declined but Japanese catches increased to maintain the catch at over 100,000 t 
through 1968, after which total catches declined more steadily (Murai 1981, Ito 1982). There are some indications 
that these early Pacific ocean perch catches, totaling over 1.1 million t between 1963 and 1968, are underestimated 
(OCSEAP 1986). Gulf of Alaska Pacific ocean perch supported an average of 40% of all landings for the species 
throughout its range between 1960 and 2002; this early fishery represented 75% of total worldwide landings (FAO 
website fishery statistics 2005). From 1989-2005, catch of POP has averaged 9,785 t annually in the GOA 
(Hanselman et al. 2005). From 1990-2006, catch of POP has averaged 1,116 t in the EBS and 11,107 t in the AI 
(Spencer and Ianelli 2006).  
Pacific ocean perch (POP) are divided into adult and juvenile groups only in the GOA model. The POP biomass 
for the entire EBS population is the 2002 NMFS slope survey estimate combined with 1991 EBS bottom trawl 
survey estimates from shelf strata. The AI biomass estimate for the whole POP population comes from the average 
of the 1991 and 1994 AI bottom trawl surveys. GOA adult biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS 
bottom trawl survey estimates. In the GOA, initial attempts at estimating juvenile (<20 cm) biomass using top-down 
methods were not successful because there are apparently few predators of juvenile POP in the GOA. Therefore, we 
estimated juvenile mortality to be 2.5, a rate comparable to those estimated by MSVPA model runs in the EBS 
(Jurado-Molina 2001). This estimated juvenile mortality rate was used to estimate juvenile biomass given the 
numbers and weight at age estimated for those years. 
The P/B and Q/B ratios in the EBS were adapted from those calculated in the GOA for adult POP, 0.1 and 2, 
respectively. The GOA adult P/B ratio of 0.09 and Q/B ratio of 1.99 were estimated from the 1990-1993 age 
structure in the POP stock assessment (Hanselman et al. 2003) and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom 
trawl surveys. The GOA juvenile POP P/B ratio of 1.1 for 1990-1993 was estimated based on stock assessment age 
166

 
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
 
   
   
    
 
  
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
   
 
 
    
 
  
 
  
  
  
   
    
     
  
 
  
   
   
  
  
  
 
 
structure and the assumed mortality rate of 2.5 (see above). The GOA juvenile POP Q/B of 3.48 was estimated by 
the same method and using the same information as for adults. The P/B and Q/B ratios in the AI were estimated by 
fitting a von Bertalanffy growth function to data from the 1991 age structure in the BSAI stock assessment, and 
weight at age data from the AI. The P/B and Q/B values are 0.21 and 1.8, respectively. 
Diet composition in the EBS and AI was based on stomachs collected during the EBS and AI bottom trawl 
surveys in 1991 and 1994. Diet composition was estimated for both adult and juvenile POP from food habits 
collections made during the 1990 and 1993 bottom trawl surveys of the GOA.  
The POP biomass data pedigree was 2 for adults in the GOA and all POP in the AI models (direct regional estimate 
with poor subregional resolution), while the EBS biomass data pedigree was 3 (proxy with known but consistent 
bias). GOA juvenile POP biomass data was rated 4 (proxy with limited confidence). P/B and Q/B parameters were 
rated 3 for adults in the GOA and all POP in the AI (proxy with known but consistent bias), and downgraded to 4 for 
juveniles in the GOA (proxy with limited confidence) and 6 for all POP in the EBS (same species in neighboring 
region). Diet composition data for POP rated 1 in all three models and all age groups (data established and 
substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial scales), 
Juvenile Pacific ocean perch (POP) have few explained sources of mortality (EE <0.01) in the GOA, the only 
system where they were modeled. They prey on euphausiids (90%) and chaetognaths (9%). In the AI, adult POP had 
high unexplained mortality, with a flow of almost 69% to detritus, followed by mortality caused by rockfish trawl 
fisheries (11% of total mortality) and fulmars and Kamchatka flounders with 4% of total mortality each. Bird 
predation on rockfish in general is likely overestimated using the diets derived from Hunt et al. 2000, which 
considered cod, pollock and rockfish as “low density” fish and hence does not specifically distinguish between adult 
and juvenile rockfish. We modified Hunt’s estimates to reduce or eliminate rockfish in seabird diets in the GOA and 
EBS unless there was evidence from other sources that seabirds prey on rockfish in those systems. Improvements in 
seabird diet data should be prioritized in future modeling efforts. In the EBS, the rockfish trawl fishery is the 
dominant POP mortality source (40%) comprising the major portion of the fishing mortality (50% total mortality), 
followed by seals (20% total mortality). Only 15% of the total mortality is not explained by the model. In GOA the 
rockfish trawl fishery is the largest source of explained mortality (13% of total mortality), followed by marine 
mammals (15%) and halibut (5%). Adult POP have direct diet data in all three systems and show different dominant 
zooplankton prey items: euphausiids are 75% of diet in GOA while mysids dominate (60%) followed by euphausiids 
(24%) in the EBS, and copepods constitute 75% of POP diet in the AI.  
Sharpchin rockfish (Sebastes zacentrus) are small roundfish in the family Scorpaenidae which range from Attu 
Island in the western Aleutians to southern California on the U.S. West Coast in depths from 25 to 660 m (Love et 
al. 2005). These rockfish grow to a maximum size of 39 cm, a similar size as Pacific ocean perch (POP) (Orr et al. 
1998), and may live to 58 years (Clausen et al. 2003a). Sharpchin rockfish are not direct targets of commercial 
fisheries, although they may be retained as bycatch along with other rockfish.  
This group was not split into adult and juvenile pools in any model due to lack of stock assessment information. 
In the all three ecosystems, sharpchin rockfish biomass estimated from trawl surveys was very low compared with 
apparent demand within the system, so biomass was estimated by assuming that EE was 0.8 for the group. Sharpchin 
rockfish are expected to occupy habitats which are poorly sampled with bottom trawl gear, hence fishery gear may 
encounter them at a higher rate than survey gear, although catches are low in both gears (e.g., 4 t fishery bycatch in 
the EBS compared with 2 t survey biomass).  
Lacking specific information on sharpchin rockfish energetics, a P/B of 0.10 and a Q/B of 2.0 were applied to 
sharpchin rockfish in all three models based on the values calculated for adult POP in the GOA. Sharpchin rockfish 
diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl surveys of the GOA. In the 
AI, no stomachs were available from either the AI or the western GOA, so the diet composition was assumed to be 
an average of all rockfish diets (except POP) based on stomachs collected in the AI during bottom trawl surveys. 
This method was also used in the EBS, where there were also no sharpchin rockfish diet collections. 
The sharpchin rockfish biomass data pedigree was 8 in all three systems (top down balance). P/B and Q/B 
parameters were rated 6 in all ecosystems (general life history proxy). Diet composition data for sharpchin rockfish 
rated 2 in the GOA model (direct estimate with limited coverage), 5 in the EBS model (general model specific to 
area), and 5 in the AI model (general model specific to area), 
167
 
 
    
   
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
   
   
     
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
    
   
 
 
 
    
   
   
  
   
   
  
     
 
  
 
     
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
  
Sharpchin rockfish mortality is dominated by fishery bycatch mortality in all three systems, explaining about 60% of 
the total mortality. The high proportion in the fisheries contrasts with the lack of catch in the surveys, indicating that 
there may be a fishery catch data problem (perhaps involving species identification?). Alternatively, perhaps 
sharpchin rockfish are overfished in all three systems (or were during the early 1990s). Sharpchins eat primarily 
copepods, euphausiids and benthic amphipods in the GOA, which total 90% of the diet. It is difficult to compare 
diets because the only system with adequate data to estimate diet composition was the GOA. Diets were the average 
of several rockfish species in the EBS and AI.  
Northern rockfish (Sebastes polyspinis) are small roundfish in the family Scorpaenidae which range from the Kuril 
Islands to northern British Columbia in depths from 10 to 740 m (Love et al. 2005). These rockfish grow to a 
maximum size of 40 cm, a similar size as Pacific ocean perch (POP) (Orr et al. 1998), and reach a maximum age of 
67 years (Courtney et al. 2003). Northern rockfish are often caught with POP, which is reflected in their catch 
history, with peak GOA catch estimated at over 17,000 t in 1965 at the height of the POP fishery. Northern rockfish 
are an important commercial species with a directed fishery in the GOA since the 1990s, with catches ranging from 
3,000 to 7,000 t annually (Courtney et al. 2006).  
This group was not split into adult and juvenile pools in the any model, but could be in the future because an age 
structured assessment is now available in the GOA. Biomass was estimated using top down balance with an EE = 
0.80 in the EBS, as no reliable trawl survey biomass estimate was available. GOA Northern rockfish biomass is the 
average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. AI biomass was the average of the 1991 and 
1994 bottom trawl survey estimates for the AI. 
Lacking specific information on northern rockfish energetics, a P/B of 0.10 and a Q/B of 2.0 were applied based 
on the values calculated for adult POP in the GOA. These same values were used for the EBS and AI models. 
Northern rockfish diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl surveys 
of the EBS, GOA, and AI in the early 1990s.  
The northern rockfish biomass data pedigree was 2 in the GOA and AI models (direct estimate with limited 
coverage), and 8 in the EBS (top down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 in all ecosystems (general 
life history proxy). Diet composition data for northern rockfish rated 2 in all three models (direct estimate with 
limited coverage), 
Northern rockfish mortality is primarily from fisheries in the EBS (over 60% of total mortality is explained by the 
combined trawl fisheries), followed by marine mammals and seabirds. In the GOA the largest single source of 
mortality is the directed rockfish trawl fishery (41%), followed by marine mammals, birds, and bycatch in other 
fisheries (together fisheries account for 45% of the total mortality). In the AI, more than half of total northern 
rockfish mortality is unexplained, with the majority of explained mortality arising from bycatch in the Atka 
mackerel trawl fishery (18%), followed by seabirds, marine mammals, and bycatch in other fisheries (this last an 
additional 3 % of total mortality). Northern rockfish eat copepods and euphausiids, primarily the former in the EBS 
(79% of diet), the latter in the GOA (95%), and a mixture in the AI, but low sample sizes (~250 for the AI) for 
northern rockfish food habits collections in all areas might render this difference between systems preliminary. 
Dusky rockfish complex (Sebastes ciliatus and S. variabilis) contains two species of relatively small roundfish in 
the family Scorpaenidae that were considered light and dark color morphs of a single species (Sebastes ciliatus) 
during the early 1990s. The lighter colored Dusky rockfish (S. variabilis) range from Japan to British Columbia in 
depths from 6 to 675 m. Dark rockfish (S. ciliatus) range from the western Aleutians to British Columbia in depths 
from 5 to 160 m (Love et al. 2005). Therefore, dusky rockfish are most common in the habitats sampled by the trawl 
survey, while dark rockfish are generally more common in shallower nearshore areas and may be less represented in 
trawl survey data (Orr and Blackburn 2004). Therefore, the data used to represent this complex likely represents the 
dusky rockfish better than the dark rockfish. Dusky rockfish grow to a maximum size of 53 cm, a similar size to 
POP (Orr et al. 1998), and a maximum age of 59 (Clausen et al. 2003b). Little is known at present about the life 
history of the newly described dark rockfish. Both species are managed within the pelagic shelf rockfish complex in 
the GOA, and in the Other rockfish complex in the BSAI. Dusky rockfish comprise most of the pelagic shelf 
rockfish complex in the GOA; estimated catches have ranged from 1600 to 4500 t a nnually between 1990 and 2005 
(Lunsford et al. 2005).  
168
 
 
   
   
   
   
   
  
  
 
   
   
    
    
    
   
   
 
 
 
    
   
   
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
     
  
    
     
  
 
  
 
 
     
  
   
  
  
   
 
  
   
This group was not split into adult and juvenile pools in any model, although a preliminary assessment for dusky 
rockfish is in development for the GOA. Dusky rockfish have similar survey biomass problems as other rockfish in 
the EBS ecosystem, but top-down balance was considered undesirable for this species which has more fishing 
mortality than natural mortality due to a relatively small amount of fishery bycatch. No stock assessment estimate of 
EBS dusky rockfish biomass is available, but this species is assessed in the GOA. Therefore, the EBS survey 
biomass estimate for dusky rockfish was scaled up by the ratio of stock assessment estimated biomass to survey 
biomass for GOA dusky rockfish (1.6), based on the assumption that an assessment in the EBS might compensate 
for bottom trawl survey biases similarly. GOA dusky rockfish biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS 
bottom trawl survey estimates. AI biomass was the average of the 1991 and 1994 bottom trawl survey estimates for 
the AI, increased in a minimal amount just to bring it into balance (EE was 1.005). This adjustment still falls well 
within the variance of the original estimate. Based on the bottom trawl surveys, the highest biomass is located in the 
central Aleutians. 
Lacking specific information on dusky rockfish energetics, a P/B of 0.10 and a Q/B of 2.0 were applied in all 
three ecosystem models based on the values calculated for adult POP in the GOA. 
Dusky rockfish diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl surveys of 
the EBS, GOA, and AI during the early 1990s.  
The dusky rockfish complex biomass data pedigree was 2 in the AI model (direct estimate with limited coverage), 3 
in the GOA model (proxy with known but consistent bias: trawl survey differs from assessment estimate) and 7 in 
the EBS (selected from multiple incomplete sources). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 in all ecosystems 
(general life history proxy). Diet composition data for dusky rockfish rated 2 in all three models (direct estimate 
with limited coverage), 
Dusky rockfish biomass required some adjustment in each system, because bottom trawl estimates can vary 
significantly from year to year. In the GOA, another survey year (1996) was included in the average, while in the 
EBS, a conversion based on stock assessments was employed to augment survey data, in the AI survey biomass was 
increased slightly to accommodate a slightly high EE (EE<1.1). Fisheries account for the highest proportion of 
dusky rockfish mortality in both the AI and the GOA (70 and 60% of the total mortality, respectively), while the 
highest proportion of mortality is from unknown sources in the EBS, followed by fisheries (35% of total mortality) 
and 18% by seals. Diets are likely not meaningfully comparable across systems because they arise from limited 
sampling, especially in the AI where they are estimated to eat exclusively benthic amphipods (sample < 10 
stomachs). Similarly, the preponderance of hermit crabs in the GOA may also be due to a limited sample size. In the 
EBS dusky rockfish eat mostly zooplankton.  
Shortraker rockfish (Sebastes borealis) are large roundfish in the family Scorpaenidae which range from northern 
Japan to central California in depths ranging from 25 to 1,200 m (Love et al. 2005). Shortraker rockfish grow very 
large, to 108 cm (Orr et al. 1998). Ageing this species has been problematic, but despite uncertainty in methodology, 
it is clear that shortrakers are very long lived, with maximum age estimates ranging from 120-157 years (Clausen et 
al. 2003a). Within the AI they are found mostly within the deep strata (200-500 m) during bottom trawl surveys 
(where surveys only go as deep as 500m). Recent catches of shortraker rockfish in the GOA have ranged from 500­
600 t (Clausen 2006b). 
This group was not split into adult and juvenile pools in any model due to lack of stock assessment information. In 
the EBS model, shortraker biomass is the 1991 EBS NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate, including the 1991 slope 
survey estimate. GOA Shortraker rockfish biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl 
survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this relatively deep 
dwelling group the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate of total 
population biomass. AI biomass was the average of the 1991 and 1994 bottom trawl survey estimates for the AI. 
Lacking specific information on shortraker rockfish energetics, a P/B of 0.10 and a Q/B of 2.0 were applied in all 
three ecosystems (EBS, GOA and AI) based on the values calculated for adult POP in the GOA, but we recognize 
that shortrakers have different growth and these parameters should be updated when data become available. 
Shortraker rockfish diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl 
surveys of the EBS, GOA, and AI in the early 1990s. 
The shortraker rockfish biomass data pedigree was 2 in the AI model (direct estimate with limited coverage), 3 in 
the GOA model (proxy with known but consistent bias: trawl survey differs from assessment estimate) and 7 in the 
169
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
   
 
 
   
  
   
   
  
  
     
    
  
 
 
     
  
   
  
  
   
   
    
     
  
    
 
 
    
 
    
   
  
 
  
 
   
   
    
  
  
EBS (selected from multiple incomplete sources). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 in all ecosystems (general 
life history proxy). Diet composition data for shortraker rockfish rated 2 in all three models (direct estimate with 
limited coverage), 
Shortraker rockfish have half of the total mortality as flow to detritus in all systems (over half of total mortality in 
the AI and GOA, and 43% in the EBS). Directed fisheries (primarily rockfish trawl) represent the largest known 
source of mortality in the AI and GOA explaining about 20-23% of the total mortality, followed by marine 
mammals in the GOA; birds and marine mammals in the AI. In the EBS, shortraker mortality is divided 
approximately equally among pinnipeds and trawl fisheries, (20% of total mortality each) followed by birds (6%). 
Shortrakers eat primarily shrimp in all systems, with a predominance of pandalid shrimp in the EBS (82%) and 
GOA (93%), and non-pandalid shrimp in the AI (99%). Mysids constitute an additional 13% of the shortraker’s diet 
in the EBS.  
Rougheye rockfish (Sebastes aleutianus) are large roundfish in the family Scorpaenidae which range from northern 
Japan to southern California in depths ranging from 25 to 900 m (Love et al. 2005). There are two species of 
rougheye rockfish which have been distinguished genetically (Gharrett et al. 2005); since a species description is 
currently in progress we treat this as a single species group until further information is available. Like shortrakers, 
rougheye rockfish achieve large maximum size (97 cm) and very old age, but age is difficult to determine. 
Maximum age estimates range from 95 to 205 years for rougheye rockfish (Clausen et al. 2003a). Within the AI they 
are found mostly within the deep strata (200-500m) during bottom trawl surveys (where surveys only go as deep as 
500m). Catches of rougheye in the GOA have ranged from 200 to 900 t annually since 1993 (Shotwell et al. 2005).  
This group was not split into adult and juvenile pools in any model due to lack of stock assessment information. In 
the EBS model, rougheye biomass is the 1991 EBS NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate, including the 1991 slope 
survey estimate. GOA rougheye rockfish biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey 
estimates, except for deep survey strata which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this relatively deep dwelling 
group the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata were substituted to give a better estimate of total population 
biomass. AI biomass was the average of the 1991 and 1994 bottom trawl survey estimates for the AI, increased in a 
minimal amount just to bring it into balance (EE was 1.008). 
Lacking specific information on rougheye rockfish energetics, a P/B of 0.10 and a Q/B of 2.0 were applied on all 
three systems (EBS, GOA and AI) based on the values calculated for adult POP in the GOA but we recognize that 
rougheye rockfish have different growth and these parameters should be updated when data become available. 
Rougheye rockfish diet composition was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom trawl 
surveys of the EBS, GOA, and AI in the early 1990s.  
The rougheye rockfish biomass data pedigree was 2 in the AI model (direct estimate with limited coverage), 3 in the 
GOA model (proxy with known but consistent bias: trawl survey differs from assessment estimate) and 7 in the EBS 
(selected from multiple incomplete sources). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 6 in all ecosystems (general life 
history proxy). Diet composition data for rougheye rockfish rated 2 in all three models (direct estimate with limited 
coverage). 
Half of rougheye rockfish total mortality is from unknown sources in the EBS and GOA. Seals cause 20% of the 
total mortality, followed by fisheries (14%) and birds (6%) in the EBS; in the GOA 23% of the total mortality is 
caused by fisheries, led by the directed rockfish and sablefish fisheries and followed by marine mammals (12%). In 
the AI, rougheye rockfish total mortality is explained predominantly by fisheries directed at rockfish, Atka mackerel 
and cod; all fisheries together account for 73% of the total mortality and birds and marine mammals explain 25%. 
Rougheye rockfish eat over 99% pandalid shrimp in the GOA and AI, but have a very different diet of squids (62%), 
euphausiids (19%), and non-pandalid shrimp (14%) in the EBS. 
Shortspine thornyhead (Sebastolobus alascanus) are medium sized roundfish in the family Scorpaenidae which 
range from 17 to 1,524 m depth and along the Pacific rim from the Seas of Okhotsk and Japan in the western north 
Pacific, throughout the Aleutian Islands, Bering Sea slope and Gulf of Alaska, and south to Baja California in the 
eastern north Pacific (Love et al. 2005). Shortspine thornyheads grow to a size of 77 cm, maturing at a length of 
about 22 cm, but ages are very uncertain; maximum age estimates range from a low of 62 years to highs over 150­
170
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
   
  
  
   
     
    
  
  
  
  
    
  
   
    
    
  
  
   
  
     
  
 
   
 
 
 
     
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
  
  
  
200 years depending on methodology (Gaichas and Ianelli 2003). Within the AI they are found mostly within the 
deep strata (200-500 m) during bottom trawl surveys (where surveys only go as deep as 500 m). Shortspine 
thornyheads are abundant throughout the Gulf of Alaska and are commonly taken by bottom trawls and longline 
gear. In the past, this species was seldom the target of a directed fishery. Today thornyheads are one of the most 
valuable of the rockfish species, with most of the domestic harvest exported to Japan (Gaichas and Ianelli 2005). 
In the EBS and AI models, shortspine thornyheads were not split into adult and juvenile groups due to a lack of 
stock assessment information. In the EBS, thornyhead biomass is the 1991 NMFS bottom trawl survey estimate 
(including the 1991 slope survey). In the AI, biomass was the average of the 1991 and 1994 bottom trawl survey 
estimates for the AI. Thornyheads were modeled as adult and juvenile pools in the GOA. GOA adult biomass is the 
average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which were 
only fully surveyed in 1999. For this relatively deep dwelling species, the 1999 survey biomass from deep strata was 
substituted to give a better estimate of total population biomass. GOA juveniles were defined as fish less than 20 cm 
in length, which roughly corresponds to 0 through 2 year old fish; biomass for this juvenile group was estimated by 
assuming that EE was 0.8 for the group.  
Thornyhead P/B and Q/B ratios for all three models were based on data from the GOA stock assessment. The 
GOA adult thornyhead P/B ratio of 0.13 and Q/B ratio of 0.44 were estimated from the 1990-1993 age structure in 
the thornyhead assessment (Gaichas and Ianelli 2003) and weight at age data collected on NMFS bottom trawl 
surveys (in this case, only U.S. West Coast surveys had any shortspine thornyhead weight at age data). The GOA 
juvenile thornyhead P/B of 0.21 and Q/B of 0.57 were estimated by the same method and using the same 
information as for adults. The production and consumption values in the EBS and the AI were rounded off from 
those estimated for juveniles and adults in the GOA, The resulting values were a PB of 0.15 and a QB of 0.5.
 Diet composition was based on food habits collections made during bottom trawl surveys of the EBS, the GOA 
and the AI from the early 1990s for each model.  
The shortspine thornyhead biomass data pedigree was 2 in the AI model (direct estimate with limited coverage), 4 
for adults in the GOA model (proxy with known but consistent bias: trawl survey differs from assessment estimate), 
7 in the EBS (selected from multiple incomplete sources), and 8 for juveniles in the GOA model (no estimate 
available, top down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters for adults were rated 3 in the GOA (proxy with known but 
consistent bias), for juveniles in the GOA rated 4 (proxy with limited coverage), and for all ages rated 6 in the EBS 
and AI (general life history proxy). Diet composition data for shortspine thornyheads rated 2 in all three models 
(direct estimate with limited coverage), 
Shortspine thornyheads are only modeled as split juvenile and adult pools in the GOA, where adult thornyheads 
cause the majority of juvenile thornyhead mortality, and juvenile diet is primarily pandalid shrimp, benthic 
amphipods, and zooplankton which together make up 80% of diet. The adult shortspine thornyheads have fishery 
dominated mortality in the GOA (52% of total mortality), but unknown sources cause some 65% of the total 
mortality in the EBS and AI (although we note that bycatch of thornyheads in halibut fisheries is unrecorded at 
present). The known mortality sources in the EBS include the fisheries (15%), marine mammals (15%) and seabirds 
(3%), and in the AI include sablefish and turbot longline fisheries (12% of total mortality), pinnipeds, and seabirds 
(16% jointly). Thornyheads eat shrimp in the GOA and AI (70 and 50% of diet respectively), but in the EBS they eat 
mysids and benthic amphipods.  
Other Sebastes is a composite group containing the remaining rockfish (Sebastes and Sebastolobus, family 
Scorpaenidae) species found in the Alaska. The complex varies by area, but the most common other Sebastes in the 
modeled sections of the GOA are the redstripe (S. proriger), harlequin (S. variegatus), silvergrey (S. brevispinis), 
and redbanded (S. babcocki). In the AI the redstripe (S. proriger) and silvergrey (S. brevispinis) are the main 
species. This is an extremely low biomass group in the EBS which is dominated by rare slope species including 
broadfin and longspine thornyheads (Sebastolobus macrochir and Sebastolobus altivelus). Most of these are non­
commercial species in all three ecosystems, although some may be retained as incidental catch in fisheries directed 
at more common rockfish species. 
In the EBS model, there was insufficient biomass of other Sebastes and Sebastolobus to supply the consumption 
demand generated by Pacific cod. Therefore, EBS other Sebastes biomass was estimated by top-down balance. 
Similarly, in the GOA, other Sebastes aggregate biomass estimated from trawl surveys was low compared with 
apparent demand within the system, and rockfish are notoriously difficult to sample with bottom trawl surveys in 
their preferred rocky reef habitat, so biomass was estimated by assuming that EE was 0.8 for the group. AI biomass 
171
 
 
  
  
  
   
  
    
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
   
  
 
    
  
   
    
  
 
    
   
   
    
   
 
    
  
 
 
  
 
   
    
 
 
    
    
 
 
was also estimated assuming an EE of 0.8. This was because this is a composite group, yet the only biomass 
estimate available was for harlequin and redbanded rockfish (Sebastes variegates and S. babcocki, respectively) at 
19 t, which was insufficient to satisfy consumption within the ecosystem. 
Lacking specific information on energetics for the rockfishes in this group, a P/B of 0.10 and a Q/B of 2.0 were 
applied in all three systems based on the values calculated for adult Pacific ocean perch in the GOA. 
Other Sebastes diet composition in the GOA was estimated from food habits collections made during bottom 
trawl surveys of the GOA. No stomachs from the AI are available for any of the Sebastes species included in this 
group, therefore diet composition was estimated from stomachs collected in the western GOA as part of the GOA 
bottom trawl surveys. In the EBS, no stomachs were available from either the AI or the western GOA, so the diet 
composition was assumed to be an average of all rockfish diets (except POP) based on stomachs collected in the 
EBS during bottom trawl surveys. 
The other Sebastes biomass data pedigree was 8 in all three systems (top down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters 
were rated 6 in all ecosystems (general life history proxy). Diet composition data for other Sebastes rockfish rated 5 
in the GOA (general model specific to area), and 6 in the EBS and AI (similar species in same region, and same 
species in neighboring region), 
Atka mackerel (Pleurogrammus monopterygius) are not mackerel at all, but medium-sized schooling roundfish in 
the family Hexagrammidae. They range from the Sea of Japan to southern California (although they are rarely found 
south of Alaska) from intertidal waters to 720 m depths (Love et al. 2005). These fish are most abundant in the AI, 
with the population apparently expanding to occupy the GOA intermittently. Atka mackerel grow rather quickly to a 
maximum size of about 55 cm and an age of 13-15 years (the highest age being observed at the center of the 
population’s abundance in the AI, Lowe and Lauth 2003). They mature at about 38 cm and 3-4 years of age in the 
GOA (McDermott and Lowe 1998). There is no age structured stock assessment for GOA Atka mackerel, because 
the population is so intermittent in the region that a fishery is not supported. However, an economically important 
commercial fishery takes place each year in the AI for Atka mackerel, where catches have ranged from 21,000 to 
over 100,000 t between 1990 and 2005 (Lowe et al. 2006). While managed as a BSAI stock, the Atka mackerel 
fishery and stock assessment are centered in the AI region of the BSAI; only a small biomass of Atka mackerel are 
found in the EBS region of the BSAI.  
Adult Atka mackerel 
Atka mackerel were divided into adult and juvenile biomass pools in all three models because juvenile Atka 
mackerel are important forage fish when present in each ecosystem. In the EBS, adult Atka mackerel biomass was 
also based on the stock assessment for the entire BSAI management area. The Atka mackerel assessment biomass 
for the BSAI was scaled down to reflect the percent of Atka mackerel occupying EBS model strata using the survey 
biomass in each stratum. In the GOA, the trawl survey biomass for this species is highly variable between GOA 
surveys because of the patchy distribution of the fish combined with occasional population expansion and 
contraction. Therefore, three surveys from the early 1990s were used to estimate biomass for GOA adult Atka 
mackerel, the 1990, 1993, and 1996 surveys. AI adult biomass was based on the average estimates from 1991 and 
1994 bottom trawl surveys. 
The best assessment information for Atka mackerel is based in the AI, and parameters for the GOA and EBS were 
derived from it. The P/B and Q/B ratios were estimated by fitting a von Bertalanffy growth function to data from the 
1991 age structure in the BSAI stock assessment, and weight at age data from the AI. The resulting rates were a PB 
of 0.348 and QB of 5.647, respectively. In the GOA and the EBS the P/B of 0.35 and Q/B of 5.65 were rounded 
from the AI values. 
Adult Atka mackerel diet composition was based on food habits collections made during bottom trawl surveys of 
the EBS, GOA, and AI during the early 1990s. 
The adult Atka mackerel biomass pedigree was 1 in the AI (established and substantial direct estimated corroborated 
by survey and assessment data) and 4 in both the EBS and GOA (direct estimate with high variation). P/B and Q/B 
parameters were rated 3 in the AI (proxy with known bias) and 5 in the EBS and GOA (general model specific to 
area). Diet compositions rated 1 in the AI (data established and substantial, with resolution on multiple spatial 
scales), 2 in the EBS (direct estimate with limited coverage), and 5 in the GOA (correct species and area but wider 
time period to increase sample size).  
172
 
 
 
    
  
  
  
  
 
    
    
   
  
   
   
  
   
 
  
 
    
   
  
 
   
    
  
 
 
    
   
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
   
   
  
    
Juvenile Atka mackerel  
Juveniles were defined as fish less than 20 cm in length, which roughly corresponds to 0 through 1 year old fish. 
Biomass for this juvenile group in both GOA and AI was estimated by assuming that EE was 0.8 for the group. Top 
down balance proved numerically unstable in the EBS where some consumption of juvenile Atka mackerel is 
believed to come from predators outside the model in the basin. Therefore, we assumed that juvenile biomass would 
be 10% of adult biomass in the EBS. This assumption could be addressed in the future if further information on Atka 
mackerel in the EBS becomes available.  
AI juvenile Atka mackerel P/B of 1.9 and Q/B of 8.9 were estimated by the same method and using the same 
information from the AI as for adults, and these values were used in the EBS and GOA models.  
The AI juvenile Atka mackerel diet composition was based on analyzed stomachs collected during 1991 and 1994 
as part of the bottom trawl surveys. Juvenile Atka mackerel diet composition information was unavailable for the 
GOA, so a similar diet composition of 90% euphausiids and 10% copepods was applied to this group as was 
assumed for all species of small pelagic forage fish. This assumption was common to the GOA and EBS models.  
The juvenile Atka mackerel biomass pedigree was 8 in all three ecosystems (no estimate available, top down 
balance). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 4 in the AI (proxy with lower confidence) and 6 in the EBS and GOA 
(general life history proxy). Diet compositions rated 2 in the AI (direct estimate with limited coverage), and 7 in the 
EBS and GOA (general literature review from a wide range of species).  
Atka mackerel juveniles have poor data in all systems. They are primarily eaten by arrowtooth flounder in the GOA, 
pollock and arrowtooth flounder in the AI, and have basically no sources of mortality nothing in the EBS. In the AI 
Adult Atka mackerel are eaten primarily by Steller sea lions (30% of total mortality) followed by Pacific cod (25%) 
and the fisheries (20%). In the GOA they are eaten by arrowtooth flounder and halibut (together 50% of the total 
mortality, followed by the short-lived Atka mackerel directed fishery that took place in the GOA during the early 
1990s and which accounted for 12% of the total mortality. Atka mackerel eat zooplankton in all systems, with 
copepods, euphausiids, and squids predominant in the AI (70 % of diet), and euphausiids constituting the main prey 
item (>90% diet) in the GOA and EBS. 
Greenlings (family Hexagrammidae) is a composite group containing all remaining members of this family aside 
from Atka mackerel, including the kelp greenling (Hexagrammos decagrammus), the rock greenling (H. 
lagocephalus), the masked greenling (H. octogrammus), and the white spotted greenling (H. stelleri). 
In the EBS model, biomass estimates were not reliable due to the patchy nature of these species, thus an EE of 0.8 
was assumed. The GOA biomass for this composite group is the sum of survey biomass estimates for each species, 
averaged between the 1990 and 1993 GOA bottom trawl surveys. This group showed a slight decline over this 
period, so a BA term of -0.002 t/km
2 was calculated from the survey time series and included for balance. In the AI, 
biomass estimates were not available, thus an EE of 0.8 was assumed. 
There is little to no life history information available for species in this group, so P/B was assumed to be 0.4 and 
Q/B was assumed to be 2.0. This set of assumptions implies that greenlings have similar production and 
consumption rates as adult Pacific cod (perhaps the quintessential default groundfish). This default assumption for 
groundfish production and consumption rates in the absence of life history information is common to the GOA, 
EBS, and AI models. 
Diet composition in the EBS was based on food habits collections taken aboard NMFS bottom trawl surveys in 
the EBS during the early 1990s. Food habits data for GOA greenlings is not available, so diet composition for this 
group was estimated based on EBS food habits data for greenlings. The AI diet composition was based on stomachs 
collected during the AI bottom trawl surveys during 1991 and 1994.  
The greenlings biomass pedigree was 8 in the EBS and AI ecosystems (no estimate available, top down balance), 
and 2 in the GOA (direct estimate with limited coverage). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 7 in all three 
ecosystems (general literature review from a wide range of species). Diet compositions rated 2 in the EBS and AI 
(direct estimate with limited coverage), and 6 in the GOA (same species in neighboring area).  
Greenlings are a relatively data poor category. From the limited data available, most mortality in the GOA is from 
Steller sea lions, while Pacific cod are eating them in the EBS and AI. Diet data is best for the EBS, where 
173
 
 
  
  
 
   
    
    
    
   
 
  
    
 
      
 
   
   
  
 
  
 
    
  
  
    
  
  
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
   
   
   
 
    
   
 
  
  
  
  
greenlings eat sculpins. Diet data is very limited in the AI and nonexistent in the GOA, where EBS information was 
substituted. 
Large sculpins (suborder Cottoidei) is a composite group which includes several common species that achieve large 
sizes in Alaska, and are thought to be most likely encountered in the commercial fisheries (Reuter and TenBrink 
2006): Myoxocephalus spp. (e.g., the great sculpin), Hemilepidotus spp. (Irish lords), and the bigmouth sculpin, 
Hemitripterus bolini. Despite their abundance and diversity, sculpin life histories are not well known in Alaska. 
Sculpins lay adhesive eggs in nests, and many exhibit parental care for eggs (Eschemeyer et al. 1983). Bigmouth 
sculpins, Hemitripterus bolini, lay eggs in vase sponges–however, it is unknown whether they are completely 
dependent on finding a particular type of sponge to reproduce. Some larger sculpin species such as the great sculpin, 
Myoxocephalus polyacanthocephalus, reach sizes of 70 cm and 8 kg in the western North Pacific. In the western 
Pacific, great sculpins are reported to have relatively late ages at maturity (5-8 years, Tokranov, 1985) despite being 
relatively short-lived (13-15 years), which suggests a limited reproductive portion of the lifespan relative to other 
groundfish species. Mean fecundities for great sculpin were 60,000 to 88,000 eggs per gram body weight (Tokranov, 
1985).  
In the EBS model, biomass for the large sculpins group was the sum of survey biomass estimates for each species 
in each model stratum from the 1991 NMFS EBS bottom trawl survey (as supplemented by the 2002 EBS slope 
survey). GOA biomass for this composite group is the sum of survey biomass estimates for each species, averaged 
between the 1990 and 1993 GOA bottom trawl surveys. In the AI no biomass estimate was available for any of the 
species in this complex and hence an EE of 0.8 was assumed to estimate biomass. 
Because there is little to no life history information available for species in this group, P/B was assumed to be 0.4 
and Q/B was assumed to be 2.0, a modification of those for Pacific cod, and the default value for sculpins, 
greenlings and miscellaneous shallow fish. This default assumption for groundfish production and consumption 
rates in the absence of life history information is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models.  
EBS large sculpin diet compositions were estimated from food habits collections taken aboard EBS trawl surveys 
during 1991. Food habits data for GOA large sculpins is not available, so diet composition for this group was 
estimated based on EBS food habits data for EBS large sculpins. The EBS diet composition was modified for the 
GOA as follows: Kamchatka flounder in the diet was added to arrowtooth flounder, yellowfin sole juveniles and 
adults in the diet were summed and entered as yellowfin sole, Northern rock sole juveniles and adults were summed 
and then divided evenly between Northern and Southern rock sole, and opilio and bairdi crabs were summed and 
entered as bairdi crabs. The feeding habits in the AI were based on stomachs collected as part of the AI bottom trawl 
surveys. 
The large sculpin biomass pedigree was 2 in the EBS and GOA models (direct estimate with limited coverage), and 
8 in the AI (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 7 in all three ecosystems 
(general literature review from a wide range of species). Diet compositions rated 2 in the EBS and AI (direct 
estimate with limited coverage), and 6 in the GOA (same species in neighboring area).  
Large sculpins have the highest biomass and the lowest explained mortality in the EBS relative to the other two 
areas, with 4% of mortality explained by fisheries and 2% explained by groundfish predation. GOA large sculpin 
mortality is 32% unexplained, followed by greenling, sablefish, sea lion and halibut predation, followed by fishery 
bycatch. Most mortality in the AI is from the Atka mackerel trawl fishery but there was no reliable biomass estimate 
for this group in that region. Diets were available only for the EBS and AI, where a variety of invertebrates are 
consumed, as well as Atka mackerel in the AI. 
Other sculpins (suborder Cottoidei) is a composite group which includes all other sculpin species in Alaska not 
found in the large sculpin group (see above). These species are thought to be less likely to comprise much 
commercial fishery bycatch, due to small size, inaccessible habitat, or both (Gaichas 2003). This category includes 
sculpins in the genera Icelus, Triglops, Artediellus, Enophrys, Gymnocanthus, Icelinus, Leptocottus, Malacocottus, 
Blepsias, Dasycottus, and Rhamphocottus, among others. Limited life history information on related species from 
other areas suggests that other sculpins have broadly similar life history to the better studied large sculpins, with 
maximum ages on the order of 10 years or less and ages at maturity ranging from 4-6 (Gaichas et al. 2004). 
174
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
    
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
   
  
    
  
    
 
     
    
  
  
  
   
 
 
   
   
Although these species are encountered on NMFS trawl surveys, they are either too small for effective catch by 
the gear or inhabit untrawlable areas, so biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8 for the group 
in all three ecosystems. 
Because there is little to no life history information available for species in this group, P/B was assumed to be 0.4 
and Q/B was assumed to be 4.0. This default assumption for groundfish production and consumption rates in the 
absence of life history information is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. 
EBS other sculpin diet compositions were estimated from food habits collections taken aboard EBS trawl surveys 
during 1991. Food habits data for GOA other sculpins is not available, so diet composition for this group was 
estimated based on EBS food habits data for EBS other sculpins. The EBS diet composition was modified for the 
GOA by assigning yellowfin sole juveniles in EBS other sculpin diets to flathead sole juveniles in GOA other 
sculpin diets. The AI diet was based on the stomach contents of samples collected in the AI as part of the bottom 
trawl surveys. AI other sculpin diet was modified to avoid within-group “cannibalism” which tended to artificially 
inflate the biomass of this top-down balanced group: the fraction corresponding to “other sculpins” moved to the 
category “size unknown”. 
The other sculpin biomass pedigree was 8 in all three models (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B and 
Q/B parameters were rated 7 in all three ecosystems (general literature review from a wide range of species). Diet 
compositions rated 2 in the EBS and AI (direct estimate with limited coverage), and 6 in the GOA (same species in 
neighboring area). 
Other sculpins are mostly eaten by Pacific cod the AI and GOA, while a variety of predators consume them in the 
EBS, including eelpouts, seals, skates, and pollock. Diets were available only in the EBS and AI. In the EBS small 
sculpins eat primarily non-pandalid shrimp and benthic amphipods. In the AI the primary diet items are polychaetes, 
benthic amphipods, and mysids.  
Miscellaneous shallow fish is a composite group containing a variety of demersal fishes, including poachers 
(Agonidae), lumpsuckers (Cyclopteridae), snailfishes (Liparidae), Arctic and saffron cod (Gadidae), ronquils 
(Bathymasteridae), wolffishes (Anarhichadidae), prowfish (Zaproridae), lampreys (Petromyzodontidae), hagfish 
(Myxinidae), and others. 
Although these species are encountered on NMFS trawl surveys, they are either too rarely encountered to 
estimate biomass, small for effective catch by the gear, or inhabit untrawlable areas, so biomass for this complex 
was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8 for the group in all three models.  
Because there is little to no life history information available for species in this group, P/B was assumed to be 0.4 
and Q/B was assumed to be 4.0. This default assumption for groundfish production and consumption rates in the 
absence of life history information is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models.  
EBS miscellaneous shallow fish diet compositions were estimated from food habits collections taken aboard EBS 
trawl surveys during 1991, but modified to reproportion the prey items and make jellyfish a minor component of the 
diet (as opposed to the dominant one). This modification was though to better represent the diet of the species other 
than snailfish and prowfish, the species most represented in survey catches in the EBS. Food habits data for GOA 
miscellaneous shallow fish is not available, so diet composition for this group was estimated based on EBS food 
habits data for this group. The EBS diet composition was modified for the GOA by removing within group 
cannibalism (to prevent artificial blow up of a top-down balanced group), and re-allocating jellyfish in diets to 
pelagic gelatinous filter feeders based on information from food habits experts that these groups may be confused in 
preserved samples combined with field observations. The AI diet was originally based on prowfish stomachs 
collected in the AI as part of the bottom trawl surveys. It was later modified in the manner described above for the 
EBS diet data, for the same reasons. 
The miscellaneous shallow fish biomass pedigree was 8 in all three models (no estimate available, top down 
balance). P/B and Q/B parameters were rated 7 in all three ecosystems (general literature review from a wide range 
of species). Diet compositions rated 5 in all three models (estimate based primarily on some species but modified to 
include others in the category).  
Octopi (Order Octopoda) are cephalopod molluscs which are related to squids. They range in size from tiny to huge, 
with the one of the largest species in the world inhabiting Alaskan waters. The North Pacific giant octopus, 
175
 
 
  
   
  
   
 
   
   
  
    
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
     
  
   
   
   
 
 
   
  
 
    
  
 
     
  
   
 
 
  
    
 
  
     
  
   
   
 
Enteroctopus dofleini, is the largest of all octopods. While this species may dominate our image of the octopus 
species complex in the Alaska, there are many more octopus species found in the area, many of which are currently 
being described (E. Jorgenson, AFSC, pers. comm., 2004). In general, short lifespans of 1 to 5 years with a single 
reproductive period are reported for octopod species (Boyle, 1983). In Japan, where giant Pacific octopus support 
directed fisheries, seasonal inshore-offshore migrations are reported, with mating occurring during autumn inshore 
in less than 100 m depth. Male octopus migrate back offshore and die, while females remain inshore, spawning 
18,000 to 74,000 eggs in shallow water nests (< 50 m) on rocky or sandy bottom between May and July. Eggs are 
brooded for 6-7 months; female octopi do not feed during this period, and die soon after the eggs hatch. Hatchlings 
are about 10 mm long, and are planktonic until growing to 20 - 50 mm, settling out to benthos in about March of the 
year following hatching (Roper et al., 1984). Life history in the eastern North Pacific is not as well known, but 
spawning may be more common in winter months (Hartwick, 1983). It is thought that giant octopus require 3 years 
to grow to an adult (mature female) size of 10 kg, and that they live 3-5 years. Because at least some octopus species 
migrate seasonally inshore and offshore, the sexes are often found in separate habitats.  
Trawl surveys do not produce reliable biomass estimates for most octopus species (Gaichas et al. 2004), so 
biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8 for the group in all three models. 
Until better information is available, P/B is assumed to be 0.8, and Q/B is assumed to be 3.65 for this relatively 
productive group. This default assumption for productive forage species is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI 
models.  
Octopus diets have not been quantitatively evaluated in Alaska. EBS octopus diet composition was based on 
assumptions about the Giant Pacific octopus, which is considered primarily a mollusc feeder with consumption of 
some crabs. Diet information is not available for GOA or AI octopi, so EBS diet compositions were substituted with 
the modification that juvenile crabs in the EBS diet which have no GOA equivalent were called miscellaneous crabs. 
The octopus biomass pedigree was 8 in all three models (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B and Q/B 
parameters were rated 7 in all three ecosystems, as were diet compositions (general literature review from a wide 
range of species).  
Octopus are primarily eaten by giant grenadiers and Pacific cod in the GOA, by pinnipeds and Pacific cod in the 
EBS, and by miscellaneous shallow fish, halibut and cod in the AI. Diet compositions were assumed similar in all 
systems, with snails, bivalves, hermit crabs, and other crabs comprising the general octopus diet.  
Squids (Order Teuthoidea) are cephalopod molluscs which are related to octopus. They are active predators which 
swim by jet propulsion, reaching swimming speeds of up to 40 km/hr, the fastest of any aquatic invertebrate. The 18 
squid species found in the mesopelagic regions of the Bering Sea represent 7 families and 10 genera (Sinclair et al. 
1999). Less is known about which squid species inhabit the GOA, but the species there are likely to represent both 
EBS species and more temperate species in the genus Loligo, which are regularly found on the U.S. West Coast and 
in British Columbia, Canada, especially in warmer years (Gaichas 2003). Squid are distributed throughout the North 
Pacific, but are common in large schools in pelagic waters surrounding the outer continental shelf and slope 
(Sinclair et al. 1999). The most common squid species in the Eastern Bering Sea are all in the family Gonatidae. 
Near the continental shelf, the more common species are Berryteuthis anonychus and Berryteuthis magister. Further 
offshore, the likely common species are Gonatopsis borealis, Gonatus middendorfi and several other Gonatus 
species, according to survey information collected in the late 1980s (Sinclair et al. 1999). The predominant species 
of squid in commercial catches in the EBS is believed to be the red squid, Berryteuthis magister, while the boreal 
clubhook squid , Onychoteuthis borealijaponicus, is likely the principal species encountered in the Aleutian Islands 
region (Gaichas, 2003). In addition, marine mammal food habits data and recent pilot studies indicate that 
Ommastrephes bartrami may also be common, in addition to Berryteuthis magister and Gonatopsis borealis (B. 
Sinclair, AFSC, pers. comm., 2001). The best studied squid in the north Pacific is Berryteuthis magister. This 
species is distributed from southern Japan throughout the Bering Sea, Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska to the 
U.S. West Coast as far south as Oregon (Roper et al. 1984). The maximum size reported for B. magister is 28 cm 
mantle length (Arkhipkin et al., 1996). B. magister from the western Bering Sea are described as slow growing (for 
squid) and relatively long lived (up to 2 years). Males grew more slowly to earlier maturation than females 
(Arkhipkin et al., 1996).  
176
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
   
  
   
  
   
 
  
   
 
   
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
   
 
   
   
   
   
  
   
   
     
The NMFS bottom trawl surveys are directed at groundfish species, and therefore do not employ the appropriate 
gear or sample in the appropriate places to provide reliable biomass estimates for the generally pelagic squids 
(Gaichas et al. 2004). Biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8 in all three models. 
Squids are highly productive and voracious predators, so a P/B of 3.2 and a Q/B of 10.62 were adapted from 
Radchenko (1992) for the EBS, GOA, and AI models.  
EBS diet composition was based on information for Berryteuthis magister (Radchenko 1992), but were modified 
to eliminate cannibalism (originally 12%) and reduce consumption of forage fish (from 5% to 2.5%), because this 
uncertain but high squid consumption may over-amplify the biomass estimates in these top down balanced groups. 
Consumption of euphausiids and copepods were increased by 12% and 10% respectively to compensate; this was 
intended to reflect the diet of smaller pelagic squid species not studied by Radchenko (1992). Diet information is not 
available for GOA or AI squids, so EBS diet compositions were substituted. 
The squids’ biomass pedigree was 8 in all three models (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B and Q/B 
parameters were rated 7 in all three ecosystems, as were diet compositions (general literature review from a wide 
range of species).  
Squids are consumed mostly by salmon returning to the GOA, giant grenadier in the EBS, and Atka mackerel and 
grenadier in the AI. Identical diet assumptions were made between systems. 
Pacific salmon (Genus Oncorhynchus) is a composite group which includes the ocean going adults and juveniles of 
pink (O. gorbuscha), chum (O. keta), coho (O. kisutch), sockeye (O. nerka), and Chinook (O. tshawytscha). Salmon 
are anadromous fish, spawning in freshwater streams so that fry and small juveniles may rear in protected waters. 
Juveniles leave freshwater to grow and mature in the open ocean basins for 1 to 5 years depending on the species, 
when they return to natal streams to spawn. Therefore, they are only transient species in ecosystem models for the 
continental shelves of the EBS, AI, and GOA. All five species are found in all three areas during in- or out-
migrations from other habitats, although within the Aleutian Islands salmon are mainly pink and chum. The five 
species of Pacific salmon support Alaska’s most important and long-running commercial fishery. The first Pacific 
salmon industrial fishery began on the Columbia River when the Hudson Bay company packed and exported salted 
Chinook salmon in the 1820s (Browning 1980). By 1880, the target species expanded beyond Chinook to sockeye 
and coho, canneries operated throughout the Pacific Northwest, and two canneries had opened in Southeast Alaska. 
Cannery expansion continued to Kodiak in 1882, and by 1888 there were 17 canneries operating in Alaska (Mohr 
1979, Browning 1980). The salmon fishery expanded quickly; by 1898 there were 55 canneries from Southeast 
Alaska to the Aleutian Islands, and up to Norton Sound in the Bering Sea. Almost a million cases were packed that 
year. The years 1914-1918 saw 53 new canneries open. By 1917 there were 118 canneries operating, and the 
industry packed 6 million cases worth $46 million. In 1919 the salmon industry reached its cannery peak with 159 
canneries and 9 million cases packed (Mohr 1979). By 1929, 156 canneries packed 5 million cases, and profits had 
fallen (Browning 1980). Landings peaked at nearly 90,000 t in the Gulf of Alaska in the late 1930s and early 1940s, 
then declined and remained relatively low throughout the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s (M. Plotnick, ADF&G, 
pers. comm., 2005). While there was not foreign fishing for salmon on the continental shelf during this period, there 
was a Japanese mothership fishery exploiting salmon in the North Pacific ocean which had its greatest fishing effort 
measured between 1968 and 1972 in the area north of 56
oN and east of 175oE (Fredin 1985). It is unknown whether 
this fishery affected salmon landings in the Gulf of Alaska, but it is known that salmon landings increased again 
beginning in 1976, and have steadily increased thereafter to average over 100,000 t between 1976 and 2002 (ADFG 
data). While some have attributed the increase in salmon landings to effective Alaskan management, others have 
suggested that a favorable climate regime boosted salmon production (Rigby et al. 1995, Mantua et al. 1997). 
Pacific salmon were divided into functional groups representing the large mature salmon returning through 
continental shelf environments on the way back to freshwater spawning grounds (Salmon Returning), and the small 
outmigrating smolts entering the oceanic habitat (Salmon Outgoing). Because these groups represent multiple 
species with different life histories and abundances, these two groups are treated separately and will not be 
parameterized to interact as adult and juvenile groups comparable to groundfish in future dynamic models. 
EBS returning salmon biomass is the 1991 catch + escapement estimated for Western Alaska (Rogers 2001) as 
proportioned to model strata by the estimated EBS trawl survey biomass for 1991. Outgoing juvenile salmon 
biomass in the EBS was estimated by top down balance assuming an EE = 0.80. The total biomass of returning 
mature salmon in the GOA, including ocean going salmon from stocks originating outside the GOA, has been 
177
 
 
  
   
 
    
  
  
  
   
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
  
    
  
   
  
 
 
  
  
    
  
 
  
   
  
  
   
 
estimated (Rogers 1987), and was proportioned to GOA strata using the proportions of salmon found on the NMFS 
bottom trawl surveys from the early 1990s. The biomass of outgoing salmon smolts is expected to be about 1/30 of 
mature GOA biomass (Rogers 1987), but because the salmon returning biomass included stocks from outside the 
GOA, a conservative biomass for GOA outgoing salmon smolts was estimated as 1/50 of that of returning mature 
salmon. In the AI Salmon returning biomass was estimated assuming a density of 0.14 throughout all strata. This 
gave a biomass estimate of 7,982 t. It was assumed that outgoing salmon were found in a density 10% that of 
returning salmon. The resulting biomass in the AI is 798 t. 
Production and consumption rates for each of the five Pacific salmon species were estimated in the field (Aydin 
2000) and were weighted by the relative biomass of each species in each area. EBS relative biomass was from 
Rogers (1997?). In the EBS, this process resulted in returning (mature) salmon P/B and Q/B ratios of 1.65 and 11.6, 
respectively. The EBS outgoing (juvenile) salmon P/B and Q/B were estimated to be 1.28 and 13.56, respectively. In 
the GOA relative biomass from Rogers (1987) and ADFG (2003) weighted species specific rates from Aydin (2000) 
to arrive at the composite P/B of 1.815 and Q/B of 11.826 for salmon returning (mature), and P/B of 1.642 and Q/B 
of 14.386 for salmon outgoing (smolts). To estimate the salmon returning production rate in the AI, salmon were 
considered to be mainly pink and chum (from tag data Myers et al. 1996). The resulting PB of 1.8 is the average of 
the PB of returning chum age 2 & 3 and pink age 1 (age/species specific rates from Aydin, 2000). The same holds 
for the calculation of QB, which resulted in a value of 12.12. To estimate the salmon outgoing AI production rate, 
salmon were considered to be mainly pink and chum (from tag data Myers et al. 1996). The resulting PB of 1.77 is 
the average of the PB of juvenile outgoing chum and pink (age/species specific rates from Aydin, 2000). The same 
holds for the calculation of QB, which resulted in a value of 16. 
Salmon diet information is sparse for Alaska. EBS salmon returning diet was assumed for a generalized salmon 
foraging on the continental shelf, realizing that the diet composition could vary greatly according to species 
composition within this composite group. This generalized diet was evenly distributed across squids, chaetognaths, 
euphausiids, pteropods and copepods (Aydin, AFSC, personal observation). EBS salmon outgoing diet was based on 
Higgs et al. (1995) again modified to represent generalized smolts of all five species. Salmon diet information was 
not available for the GOA or AI, so diet composition for EBS salmon returning and EBS salmon outgoing were 
substituted. 
The salmon returning (adult) biomass pedigree was 6 in all three models (historical information). P/B and Q/B 
parameters were rated 5 in all three ecosystems, as were diet compositions (general model specific to area).  
The salmon outgoing (smolt) biomass pedigree was 7 in all three models (multiple incomplete sources). P/B and 
Q/B parameters were rated 6 in all three ecosystems, as were diet compositions (general life history proxies and 
generalized diet across species).  
Salmon returning to natal streams as spawning adults have half to two thirds unexplained mortality in the GOA and 
AI, respectively. However, Alaska skates are the largest (40%) source of mortality in the EBS for salmon returning 
even though salmon is only 2% of Alaska skate diet. Fur seals are the next largest source of salmon mortality in the 
EBS, followed by sleeper sharks and cod. In the GOA the salmon fleet accounts for 21% of mortality, followed by 
arrowtooth flounder, salmon sharks, and sea lion predation. In AI, sea lions account for 30% of mortality, followed 
by salmon sharks and whales. Salmon returning diet assumptions were common to all three models. Salmon 
outgoing to the ocean as smolts have mostly unexplained mortality in the GOA, but are eaten by fur seals in the EBS 
and sea lions in the AI.  
Bathylagidae is a composite taxonomic group containing all members of this family of deep-sea smelts found in 
Alaska. Maximum lengths for common North Pacific Bathylagids range from 12-25 cm (Nelson 2003). No biomass 
estimate exists for this group of small mesopelagic schooling fishes (Nelson 2003), so biomass for this group was 
estimated by assuming EE was 0.8 in all three models. Similarly, energetics information is not available for this 
group. Until better information is available, P/B is assumed to be 0.8, and Q/B is assumed to be 3.65 for this 
relatively productive group. This default assumption for productive forage species is common to the GOA, EBS, and 
AI models. Bathylagid diet composition information was unavailable for the GOA, so a similar diet composition of 
90% euphausiids and 10% copepods was applied to this group as was assumed for all species of small pelagic forage 
fish. This assumption was also common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. 
The data pedigree for species Biomass was 8 (estimated by Ecopath), while PB, QB, and Diets were 7 (general 
literature review for a wide range of species). 
178
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
    
 
  
  
 
   
  
   
   
   
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
  
    
 
     
 
  
   
    
 
   
 
   
 
   
  
 
All forage fish groups (Bathylagids, Myctophids, Capelin, Sand lance, Eulachon, Managed forage, and Other 
pelagic smelt) are top down balanced in all systems and share an identical zooplankton diet in all systems. However 
their predators differ significantly across systems. Bathylagids are eaten primarily by pollock in the EBS, by a 
combination of pollock and grenadiers in the AI, and by grenadiers in the GOA. 
Myctophidae is a composite taxonomic group containing all members of this family of lanternfishes found in 
Alaska. Myctophids are a key prey item for both fish and marine mammals in the Aleutian Islands, particularly 
towards the west. In a global context, they are among the most abundant group of mesopelagic fishes. The group 
includes all members of the family, but within Alaska the dominant species are the California headlightfish 
(Diaphus theta), lampfish (Lampanyctus sp., Stenobrachius sp., Protomyctophum sp.), broken line myctophid (L. 
jordani), lanternfish (L. tenuiformes), northern lampfish (S. leucopsarus), garnet myctophid (S. nannochiri), bigfin 
lanternfish (Symbolophorus californiense), and blue lanternfish (Tarletonbeania crenularis). All members of the 
family have photophores on the head and body (hence the name lanternfish/ lampfish). Most myctophids are less 
than 10 cm long, but some reach about 30 cm. They are oviparous, with planktonic eggs and larvae (Moser and 
Ahlstrom, 1996). Diurnal migration is exhibited by many: most species have peak abundance between 300 and 1200 
m by day and between 10 and 100 m at night (Nelson 1994).  
No biomass estimate exists for this group of small mesopelagic schooling fishes (Nelson 2003), so biomass for 
this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. Similarly, energetics information is not available for this group. 
Until better information is available, P/B is assumed to be 0.8, and Q/B is assumed to be 3.65 for this relatively 
productive group. This default assumption for productive forage species is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI 
models.  
Myctophid diet composition information was unavailable for the GOA, so a similar diet composition of 90% 
euphausiids and 10% copepods was applied to this group as was assumed for all species of small pelagic forage fish. 
This assumption was common to the GOA and EBS models, but limited food habits information was available for 
the AI and was used in that model. 
The data pedigree for species Biomass was 8 (estimated by Ecopath), while PB, QB, and Diets were 7 (general 
literature review for a wide range of species). 
All forage fish groups (Bathylagids, Myctophids, Capelin, Sand lance, Eulachon, Managed forage, and Other 
pelagic smelt) are top down balanced in all systems and share an identical zooplankton diet in all systems. However 
their predators differ significantly across systems. Myctophids are being eaten by squids in all systems, but by more 
diverse predators in the AI which has the best myctophid data in general. Pollock and grenadiers also eat myctophids 
in the AI.  
Capelin (Mallotus villosus) are small, densely schooling smelts found throughout the shallow nearshore waters of 
Alaska. They reach a maximum size of 25 cm and an age of 4 years, with maturity arriving at 3-4 years. Spawning 
takes place in intertidal sand and gravel, and most capelin die after spawning once (Nelson 2003). No biomass 
estimate exists for this group of small pelagic schooling fishes, so biomass for this group was estimated by assuming 
EE was 0.8. Similarly, energetics information is not available for this group. Until better information is available, 
P/B is assumed to be 0.8, and Q/B is assumed to be 3.65 for this relatively productive group. This default 
assumption for productive forage species is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. Capelin diet composition 
information was unavailable for the GOA, so a similar diet composition of 90% euphausiids and 10% copepods was 
applied to this group as was assumed for all species of small pelagic forage fish. This assumption was common to 
the GOA, EBS, and AI models. 
The data pedigree for species Biomass was 8 (estimated by Ecopath), while PB, QB, and Diets were 7 (general 
literature review for a wide range of species). 
All forage fish groups (Bathylagids, Myctophids, Capelin, Sand lance, Eulachon, Managed forage, and Other 
pelagic smelt) are top down balanced in all systems and share an identical zooplankton diet in all systems. However 
their predators differ significantly across systems. Capelin are eaten by arrowtooth flounder, pollock, and squids in 
the GOA, and primarily by squids in the EBS and AI.  
179
 
 
   
 
   
 
    
 
   
 
   
 
   
 
     
  
  
 
   
      
   
 
  
 
  
   
 
   
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
   
 
   
 
    
 
Sand lance (Ammodytes hexapterus) are small, eel-like benthic fish which reach a maximum size of 17 cm and an 
age of 6 years (Robards et al. 1999), maturing at 2-3 years and 10-15 cm (Nelson 2003). No biomass estimate exists 
for this group of small benthic schooling fishes, so biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. 
Similarly, energetics information is not available for this group. Until better information is available, P/B is assumed 
to be 0.8, and Q/B is assumed to be 3.65 for this relatively productive group. This default assumption for productive 
forage species is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. Sand lance diet composition information was 
unavailable for the GOA, so a similar diet composition of 90% euphausiids and 10% copepods was applied to this 
group as was assumed for all species of small pelagic forage fish. This assumption was common to the GOA, EBS, 
and AI models. 
The data pedigree for species Biomass was 8 (estimated by Ecopath), while PB, QB, and Diets were 7 (general 
literature review for a wide range of species). 
All forage fish groups (Bathylagids, Myctophids, Capelin, Sand lance, Eulachon, Managed forage, and Other 
pelagic smelt) are top down balanced in all systems and share an identical zooplankton diet in all systems. However 
their predators differ significantly across systems. Sand lance are also eaten by squids, but mortality is more evenly 
divided between squids, pollock, rock sole and cod in the EBS, and by squids, arrowtooth flounder, and pollock in 
the GOA. 
Eulachon (Thaleichthys pacificus) are anadromous smelts which achieve a maximum size of 25 cm and age of 5, 
but like capelin, they most often do not survive past one spawning, which may happen as early as age 3 (Nelson 
2003). No biomass estimate exists for this group of small pelagic schooling fishes, so biomass for this group was 
estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. Similarly, energetics information is not available for this group. Until better 
information is available, P/B is assumed to be 0.8, and Q/B is assumed to be 3.65 for this relatively productive 
group. This default assumption for productive forage species is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. 
Eulachon diet composition information was unavailable for the GOA, so a similar diet composition of 90% 
euphausiids and 10% copepods was applied to this group as was assumed for all species of small pelagic forage fish. 
This assumption was common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. 
The data pedigree for species Biomass was 8 (estimated by Ecopath), while PB, QB, and Diets were 7 (general 
literature review for a wide range of species). 
All forage fish groups (Bathylagids, Myctophids, Capelin, Sand lance, Eulachon, Managed forage, and Other 
pelagic smelt) are top down balanced in all systems and share an identical zooplankton diet in all systems. However 
their predators differ significantly across systems. Eulachon are primarily eaten by squid in the EBS and AI, and 
squid combined with arrowtooth flounder in the GOA.  
Other Managed forage is a composite group which includes other members of a North Pacific management 
category known as “forage fish” aside from the separately grouped and more common capelin, eulachon, sand lance, 
bathylagids, and myctophids (see above). Managed forage includes the Pacific sandfish ( Trichodon trichodon), 
gunnels (Pholidae), bristlemouths and anglemouths (Gonatostomatidae), and pricklebacks, warbonnets, eelblennys, 
cockscombs, and shannys (Sticheidae). No biomass estimate exists for this group of generally small but numerous 
fishes, so biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. Similarly, energetics information is not 
available for this group. Until better information is available, P/B is assumed to be 0.8, and Q/B is assumed to be 
3.65 for this relatively productive group. This default assumption for productive forage species is common to the 
GOA, EBS, and AI models. Managed forage diet composition information was unavailable for the GOA, so a 
similar diet composition of 90% euphausiids and 10% copepods was applied to this group as was assumed for all 
species of small pelagic forage fish. This assumption was common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. 
The data pedigree for species Biomass was 8 (estimated by Ecopath), while PB, QB, and Diets were 7 (general 
literature review for a wide range of species). 
All forage fish groups (Bathylagids, Myctophids, Capelin, Sand lance, Eulachon, Managed forage, and Other 
pelagic smelt) are top down balanced in all systems and share an identical zooplankton diet in all systems. However 
their predators differ significantly across systems. Managed forage are primarily eaten by squid in the EBS and AI, 
and squid combined with arrowtooth flounder in the GOA, but we know little about them in any system.  
180
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
      
 
   
 
   
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
   
 
  
    
   
 
  
  
   
   
   
   
 
 
   
   
  
 
   
Other pelagic smelts is a composite group which includes herring smelts or argentines (Argentinidae), surf smelts 
(Hypomesus pretiosus), whitebait smelts (Allosmerus elongatus), and rainbow smelts (Osmerus mordax). No 
biomass estimate exists for this group of small pelagic schooling fishes, so biomass for this group was estimated by 
assuming EE was 0.8. Similarly, energetics information is not available for this group. Until better information is 
available, P/B is assumed to be 0.8, and Q/B is assumed to be 3.65 for this relatively productive group. This default 
assumption for productive forage species is common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. Other pelagic smelt diet 
composition information was unavailable for the GOA, so a similar diet composition of 90% euphausiids and 10% 
copepods was applied to this group as was assumed for all species of small pelagic forage fish. This assumption was 
common to the GOA, EBS, and AI models. 
The data pedigree for species Biomass was 8 (estimated by Ecopath), while PB, QB, and Diets were 7 (general 
literature review for a wide range of species). 
All forage fish groups (Bathylagids, Myctophids, Capelin, Sand lance, Eulachon, Managed forage, and Other 
pelagic smelt) are top down balanced in all systems and share an identical zooplankton diet in all systems. However 
their predators differ significantly across systems. Other pelagic smelts are primarily eaten by squid in the EBS and 
AI, and squid combined with arrowtooth flounder in the GOA, but we know little about them in any system.  
6.5 Benthic Invertebrates 
Tanner crab (Chionoecetes bairdi) is a large brachyuran (true) crab in the family Majidae that ranges from the 
Kuril Islands and the southeast Bering Sea to Oregon in relatively warmer and deeper waters than its congener, the 
snow crab (C. opilio) (Slizkin 1989, Orensanz et al. 1988). While it is difficult to determine the age of crabs, Tanner 
crabs are thought to live to 14 years of age, with males of commercial size ranging from 7 to 11 years and 1-2 kg 
(ADF&G 1994). Tanner crabs comprised approximately two thirds of the measured benthic invertebrate biomass in 
the Central and Western GOA during the late 1970s (Feder and Jewett 1986). However, by the mid 1990s biomass 
was substantially reduced for this commercially important species, to the extent that directed Tanner crab fisheries 
around Kodiak were closed from 1994-2000. The Kodiak fishery reopened in 2001-2006 (Sagalkin 2004, 2006). 
Tanner crab fisheries off the Alaska Peninsula were closed from 1989-1999, and reopened in the 2000-1, 2004-5, 
and 2005-6 seasons (Mattes 2006). Bering Sea Tanner crab fisheries have been closed since 1997 (Woodby et al 
2005).  
Tanner crabs were modeled as a single biomass pool in the AI and GOA models, and as adults and juveniles 
(<5cm carapace width) in the EBS model. Adult Tanner crabs are found only in the middle and outer southeast 
model strata in the EBS; the biomass estimate for 1991 is from NMFS (Stevens et al. 2002). Juvenile EBS Tanner 
crab biomass was estimated using a top down balance with an EE=0.80. Although there were some estimates of 
biomass for GOA Tanner crabs from NMFS and ADF&G trawl surveys during the early 1990s, none were sufficient 
to meet the apparent groundfish predation demand estimated from food habits sampling. Trawl surveys are not 
designed to estimate crab biomass in the GOA, and the crab surveys conducted by ADF&G are too limited in spatial 
extent to apply Gulfwide, so biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.80. This procedure 
resulted in biomass estimates two orders of magnitude higher than those estimated by the NMFS GOA trawl survey, 
and 71% higher than the highest estimate produced by any ADF&G survey from 1989-2002. Note that this Tanner 
crab biomass estimated by the early 1990s GOA model is an order of magnitude lower than that reported for the late 
1970’s (Feder and Jewett 1986), and so seems plausible. AI Tanner crab biomass was also estimated using a top 
down balance with an EE of 0.80.  
P/B and Q/B parameters for Tanner crabs were derived from Trites et al. (1999) and from stock assessment 
information available for the EBS (OSCEAP 1986). EBS adult Tanner crab P/B and Q/B were estimated to be 1 and 
2.75, respectively, while juvenile Tanner crab values were 1.35 and 3.84 in the EBS. These values were adapted for 
the whole population biomass pools in the GOA and the AI so that the P/B and Q/B were 1 and 3, respectively in 
both models. 
Diet information for adult and juvenile Tanner crabs was available only for the EBS from a Russian survey of 
the area in 1972 (Tarverdieva 1976). This information was specific to adult and juvenile crabs, but was averaged to 
account for the entire populations of the GOA and AI, since no other information was available.  
The Tanner crab biomass pedigree was 2 for EBS adults (direct regional estimate with poor subregional resolution) 
and 8 for EBS juveniles and the entire populations in the GOA and AI (no estimate available, top down balance). 
P/B parameters were rated 6 for all ages in all three ecosystems (general life history proxy), while Q/B parameters 
181
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
 
   
 
      
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
   
    
  
    
      
  
 
 
    
 
    
 
  
  
  
 
    
 
  
  
  
    
 
   
  
 
   
  
   
  
 
   
were rated 5 for all ages in all three ecosystems (same species in historical time period). Diet compositions rated 5 in 
the EBS for both age groups (same species in historical time period) and 7 in the AI and GOA (general literature 
review).  
Tanner crab juveniles (EBS) are eaten by cod, small sculpins, and sea stars. The juveniles eat very small clams, 
based on data from the 1970s from Russia. Adult bairdi have a biomass estimate in the EBS, but are top down 
balanced in the AI and GOA. In those systems octopus causes the most mortality, followed by eelpouts in the AI and 
cod in the GOA. About 10% of mortality is unexplained in the EBS, with 72% of mortality caused by cod predation 
and 12% from the crab pot fishery. There are no current fisheries in AI or GOA. Bairdi adults in the EBS and all 
bairdi in all areas use diets from the EBS, where adults eat mostly polychaetes and clams. 
King Crab (Lithodidae) is a composite group of Anomuran crabs which contains red king crab (Paralithodes 
camtschaticus), blue king crab (Paralithodes platypus), and golden or brown king crab (Lithodes aquispina) in 
Alaska (Orensanz et al. 1998). In terms of habitat preference, summer distributional patterns for red king P. 
camtschaticus and Tanner crab Chionoecetes bairdi were examined by manned submersible in the southeast Alaska 
fjord. Videos showed highest crab densities for both species were in the sand-mud habitat, while no crabs were 
observed in the rock wall and algae habitats. Peak depths are distinct, 75 m for king crab and 145 m for Tanner crab 
(Zhou & Shirley, 1998). Such distribution changes seasonally, at least for ovigerous female red king crab, which has 
been monitored with ultrasonic biotelemetry. Crabs occupied deep water between summer-fall (June and mid-
November) then moved to relatively shallow water during late-fall winter (mid-November and early March), then 
returned to deeper water before molting and mating in spring. Females were nonrandomly distributed both in deep 
and shallower waters, their behavior and degree of aggregation changing seasonally. Crabs were more aggregated in 
winter; females of mixed age-classes formed dense aggregations in shallow water. They were less so in summer and 
fall. Adult males were associated with aggregations during late winter and early spring (Stone et al. 1993). In golden 
crabs the number of days between the first and last egg hatching is about 34; about 192 days after the last egg 
hatched, females molted, the eggs being extruded 2 days after the molt. The egg clutches are incubated for some 362 
days, successive egg clutches happening about 590 days apart. (Paul and Paul, 2001a). Laboratory studies showed 
that even when some test males had exclusive access to three ripe females, not all induced the third female to 
ovulate but the first two mates produced viable clutches with 81-100% of eggs exhibiting development. For the third 
mate these proportions decreased to 56 to 100%. (Paul and Paul, 2001b). These commercially important crabs are 
currently fished only in the EBS (red in Bristol Bay and blue near St. Matthews Island) and AI. The king crab 
fisheries in the Aleutians are reported off Adak for red king crab Paralithodes camtschaticus and golden (brown) 
king crab Lithodes aequispinus. Both fisheries were open during 1991 and 1994, the first one was closed in 1996. 
King crab biomass has changed dramatically in the GOA over the past century. Red king crabs were commercially 
fished as early as 1935 in the GOA (Feder and Jewett 1986), with the peak commercial landings occurring in the 
1966 at 45,000 t, and steady landings in the 10,000 t range throughout the 1970’s. The landings, and presumably the 
biomass, of GOA king crabs dropped off abruptly in 1982, and the fishery was closed in 1983-1984 (Feder and 
Jewett 1986). GOA king crabs have not recovered as of 2006. 
King crabs were modeled as a single biomass pool in the AI and GOA models, and as adults and juveniles 
(<10cm carapace length) in the EBS model. Biomass estimates for adult EBS king crabs are 1991 NMFS EBS 
bottom trawl survey estimates, as supplemented by 2002 EBS slope survey estimates. Juvenile EBS king crab 
biomass was estimated using a top down balance with an EE=0.80. No crab specific surveys take place in the AI, so 
biomass was roughly estimated based on catches and a logistic model: king crab catches were summed over a 3 year 
window from 1991 to 1994 and then averaged. Therefore, 1991 + 1992 + 1993 catch is biomass in 1991 assuming 
there at least had to be the biomass of the three next years in the stock. Likewise for 1992 + 1993 + 1994, and so on. 
Then the 3 year windows for the years 1991-1994 were averaged to give a minimum biomass estimate of King crab 
in Adak. No comprehensive surveys of king crab biomass in the GOA have been conducted. We assumed that king 
crab biomass remains at a historical low in the GOA. Limited surveys in areas of historical king crab abundance 
were used to estimate king crab density: ADFG surveys around Kodiak (1989) indicated a density of 0.18 t/km
2, 
which was rounded down to 0.1 to account for unsurveyed areas with lower abundance in the central GOA shelf and 
gully model strata, and ADF&G surveys near the Alaska peninsula (2002) indicated a king crab density of 0.004 
t/km2, which was increased to 0.005 for balance in the western GOA shelf and gully model strata. King crabs were 
assumed to be absent from eastern GOA model strata, and all slope strata, although limited NMFS trawl survey data 
suggests that density on the central slope may be as high as 0.002 t/km
2. 
P/B and Q/B parameters for king crabs were derived from Trites (1999) and from stock assessment information 
available for the EBS (OSCEAP 1986). EBS adult king crab P/B and Q/B were estimated to be 0.6 and 2.7, 
182
 
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
   
 
   
 
   
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
     
 
   
 
     
    
 
 
 
  
  
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
respectively, while juvenile king crab values were 1.5 and 3.7 in the EBS. These values were adapted for the whole 
population biomass pools in the GOA and the AI so that the P/B and Q/B were 0.6 and 3, respectively in both 
models.  
Diet information for adult and juvenile king crabs was available only for the EBS from a Russian survey of the 
area in 1972 (Tarverdieva 1976). This information was specific to adult and juvenile crabs, but was averaged to 
account for the entire populations of the GOA and AI, since no other information was available.  
The king crab biomass pedigree was 2 for EBS adults (direct regional estimate with poor subregional resolution), 5 
for GOA king crabs (direct estimate but with highly uncertain scaling factors), 7 for AI king crabs (multiple 
incomplete sources), and 8 for EBS juveniles (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B parameters were rated 
6 for all ages in all three ecosystems (general life history proxy), while Q/B parameters were rated 5 for all ages in 
all three ecosystems (same species in historical time period). Diet compositions rated 5 in the EBS for both age 
groups (same species in historical time period) and 7 in the AI and GOA (general literature review).  
King crab juveniles (EBS) are eaten by large sculpins. King crab adults have very different sources of mortality 
between systems. Biomass is so low in the GOA that a few large sculpins eating them is a huge source of mortality 
(85%), while EBS adult mortality is dominated by Pacific cod (20%) and the crab fishery (14%). The crab fishery 
dominates AI mortality at 62%, followed by thornyhead, halibut, and whiteblotched skate predation. All diet data for 
king crabs is derived from the EBS, where they eat a variety of benthos, including snails, polychaetes, clams, and 
urchins (almost entirely sand dollars).  
Snow Crab (Chionoecetes opilio) is a large brachyuran (true) crab in the family Majidae that ranges throughout the 
Arctic into southeast Bering Sea in relatively colder and shallower waters than its congener, the Tanner crab ( C. 
bairdi) (Slizkin 1989, Orensantz et al. 1998). While it is difficult to determine the age of crabs, snow crabs are 
thought to be similar to Tanner crabs in that they live to 14 years of age, with males of commercial size ranging 
from 7 to 11 years and 0.5-1 kg (ADFG Wildlife Notebook Series). Snow crabs are the target of an economically 
important fishery in the EBS. However, they are extremely rare in the GOA and AI; a trace biomass of less than a 
ton Gulfwide was estimated from NMFS trawl surveys. In results and discussion from the GOA and AI model, snow 
crabs are not included.  
Snow crabs were modeled as adults and juveniles (<5cm carapace width) in the EBS. Adult snow crabs are 
found in all model strata in the EBS; the biomass estimate for 1991 is from NMFS (Stevens et al. 2002). Juvenile 
EBS snow crab biomass was estimated using a top down balance with an EE = 0.80. 
 P/B and Q/B parameters for snow crabs were derived from Trites (1999) and from stock assessment 
information available for the EBS (OSCEAP 1986). EBS adult snow crab P/B and Q/B were estimated to be 1 and 
2.75, respectively, while juvenile snow crab values were 1.35 and 3.84 in the EBS. 
Diet information for adult and juvenile snow crabs was available only for the EBS from a Russian survey of the 
area in 1972 (Tarverdieva 1976).  
The snow crab biomass pedigree was 2 for EBS adults (direct regional estimate with poor subregional resolution) 
and 8 for EBS juveniles (no estimate available, top down balance). P/B parameters were rated 6 for all ages (general 
life history proxy), while Q/B parameters were rated 5 for all ages (same species in historical time period). Diet 
compositions rated 5 in the EBS for both age groups (same species in historical time period).  
Snow crabs are only modeled in the EBS, where juveniles are eaten by eelpouts and cod, sea stars, then octopus. 
Juveniles eat benthic detritus, polychaetes and clams. Opilio adults have much (66%) unexplained mortality, 
followed by fishery mortality (16%) and cod predation (8%). Opilio eat polychaetes, bivalves, detritus, and other 
benthic prey. 
Pandalid shrimp is a composite group which contains commercial shrimp species in the family Pandalidae, 
including the pink shrimp (Pandalus borealis), the humpy shrimp (Pandalus goniurus), the sidestripe shrimp 
(Pandalopsis dispar), the coonstripe shrimp (Pandalus hypsinotis), and the spot shrimp or spot prawn (Pandalus 
platyceros). Pandalid shrimps are opportunistic feeders and have a boreo-artic distribution in both the Pacific and 
Atlantic Oceans, inhabiting varying depths and habitat types. Spots and coonstripes are generally associated with 
rock piles, coral, and debris-covered bottoms, whereas pinks, sidestripes, and humpies typically occur over muddy 
bottom. Pink or northern shrimp can occur anywhere between 30-1,460 m; humpies and coonstripes usually inhabit 
183
 
 
    
     
 
      
  
   
   
   
 
 
   
 
    
 
    
  
   
  
 
  
  
  
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
   
    
   
 
 
 
  
  
   
   
 
  
 
  
shallower waters, 10-370 m; spot shrimp (or spot prawn) range from 5 to 450 m, and sidestripes can be found 
somewhat deeper, 45 to 640 m though most concentrations occur at depth greater than 70 m. Most pandalids have 
seasonal migrations, from deep to shallow waters and up the water column. For example, pink shrimp, may move 
off the bottom towards the evening, occupy the whole water column through the night, and return to the bottom in 
early morning. Pandalids are protandric hermaphrodites, which means they mature as males and then become 
females. The females carry anywhere between a few hundred to up to 4,000 eggs until they hatch; clutch size is 
generally proportional to the size of the female. Pandalids tend to spawn in fall and hatch in spring, but this may 
vary among species and range. Pandalid shrimps have been used as ecosystem indicators in the Gulf of Alaska, their 
abundance declined quickly following water column warming caused by an abrupt climate change after 1977 
(Anderson, 2000). Like Tanner crabs and king crabs, Pandalid shrimp appear to have declined dramatically in the 
GOA since fishery catches peaked during the 1960’s (Orensanz et al. 1998). No comprehensive measurement of 
Gulfwide Pandalid biomass has ever taken place, but the evidence for decline comes from both fishery landings time 
series and nearshore small mesh trawl surveys conducted by ADF&G (Anderson and Piatt 1999). 
Due to the low catchability of shrimps in bottom trawl surveys, Pandalids in the EBS and AI were estimated by 
assuming an EE of 0.8. Although there were some estimates of biomass for GOA Pandalids from NMFS and 
ADF&G trawl surveys during the early 1990’s, none were sufficient to meet the apparent groundfish predation 
demand estimated from food habits sampling. NMFS groundfish trawl surveys are not designed to estimate shrimp 
biomass in the GOA, and the small mesh surveys conducted by ADF&G are too limited in spatial extent to apply 
Gulfwide, so biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. This procedure resulted in a biomass 
estimate three orders of magnitude higher than that estimated by the NMFS GOA trawl survey.  
The P/B of 0.57 and Q/B of 2.4 was based on growth and longevity studies of spot shrimp in Prince William 
Sound, Alaska (Kimker et al. 1996). These values were used in all three models. Shrimp diets were assumed 
identical in all three models and were estimated from information found in Feder (1978) and Rice (1981). 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance), while P/B and Q/B were 5 
(Alaskan area reference for appropriate species, but covering limited species in this functional group). Diet estimates 
were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Pandalid shrimp are important prey items, but little information is available on their diets or their biomass, so 
common assumptions (including top down balance) were made in all models. Pandalids in the GOA are eaten by 
pollock (35%), arrowtooth (13%), and flathead sole (10%). Pandalids in the EBS are also consumed by pollock 
(57% of mortality). In the AI, most mortality of pandalid shrimp is from miscellaneous shallow fish and sculpin 
predation (41% combined). Pandalid shrimp eat benthic detritus, benthic amphipods and euphausiids and clams. 
Non-Pandalid shrimp is a composite group which contains all other (generally non-commercial) shrimp species 
outside the family Pandalidae. At least seven families comprise this group, including Penaeidae, Sergestidae, 
Caridea, Oplophoridae, Pasiphaeidae, Hippolytidae, and Crangonidae. The most representative genera are 
Spirontocaris sp. (6 species), Eualus sp. (11 species), Crangon sp. (8 species), Argis sp. (6 species), and 
Metacrangon sp. (4 species) but multiple other genera are also included (Metapenaeopsis sp, Sergestes sp, 
Bentheogennema sp., Hymenodora sp., Pasiphaea sp. (glass shrimp), Parapasiphae sp. (grooved-back shrimp),. 
Lebbeus sp., Heptacarpus sp., Sclerocrangon sp., and Rhynocrang sp.). Non-pandalid shrimps have a wide depth 
range, though most of them are generally found in the mesopelagic zone, located roughly around at 200 m depth. 
None of them support a commercial fishery in Alaskan waters, though they do in some other areas of the North 
Pacific. Hyppolytids (cleaner shrimps) are known to associate with anemones; within Alaska (around Kodiak 
Island), the pink sea anemone Cribrinopsis fernaldi was observed surrounded by several species of Caridean shrimp. 
These were aggregated in a radial pattern beneath or just beyond the anemone’s tentacle canopy. The caridean 
species observed included Eualus suckleyi, Spirontocaris sp., Lebbeus grandimanus, L. groenlandicus and Pandalus 
tridens, but not Pandalus borealis, although it was probably also present. The number of shrimps per anemone 
increased with depth from 61 to 115m; more shrimp were observed on silty-sand than on sandy-gravel substrates. 
(Stevens and Anderson, 2000). 
Non-pandalid shrimp biomass for all models was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. For the GOA, this 
procedure resulted in a biomass estimate five orders of magnitude higher than that estimated by the NMFS GOA 
trawl survey. 
The P/B of 0.57 and Q/B of 2.4 were based on growth and longevity studies of spot shrimp in Prince William 
Sound, Alaska (Kimker et al. 1996), and were applied to non-pandalid shrimp in all three models. Diets were 
likewise assumed identical to those of pandalid shrimp, as no data were available specific to non-pandalids. 
184
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
    
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
   
    
 
   
    
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
    
 
  
   
    
   
 
   
 
 
  
  
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance), while P/B and Q/B were 6 
(ranking of 5 were appropriate for Pandalidae, this was downgraded for non-pandalid shrimp due to species 
differences). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Non-pandalid shrimp are important prey items, but little information is available on their diets or their biomass, so 
common assumptions (including top down balance) were made in all models. GOA non-pandalids are eaten 
primarily by pollock and grenadiers. Most mortality on EBS non-pandalid shrimp is from sculpins (15%), grenadiers 
(14%), and pollock (13%) to a lesser extent. In the AI, non-pandalid mortality is mostly from deep dwelling 
miscellaneous fish (prowfish) and juvenile pollock (40% combined). Non-pandalid shrimp eat benthic detritus, 
benthic amphipods and euphausiids and clams. 
Sea Stars is a composite group which contains all members of the class Asteriodea, particularly the Family 
Asteriidae. One of the most common species in Alaska, and especially the GOA, is Ctenodiscus crispatus, the mud 
sea star, but the family is well represented and varied. Other common species include: blackspined sea star 
Lethasterias nanimensis, cookie star Ceramaster patagonicus, crested sea star Lophaster furcilliger, cushion sea star 
Pteraster tesselatus, fish-eating star Stylasterias forreri, northern sea star Dipsacaster borealis, redbanded sea star 
Leptasterias coei, rose sea star Crossaster papposus, scarlet sea star Pseudarchaster parelii, spiny red star 
Hippasteria spinosa and sunflower sea star Pycnopodia helianthoides. Sea stars do not have a sharp demarcation 
between the arms and central body; they move along the sea floor using their tube feet. Most sea stars are predators, 
feeding on either sessile or slow-moving prey such as mollusks and barnacles; sea stars turn a portion of their 
stomachs out through the mouth, which enables them to digest exogenously.  
For EBS biomass, the estimate from the 1991 summer trawl survey was used without adjustment. Biomass 
estimates for GOA sea stars were drawn from multiple sources; a density estimate for western GOA model strata 
was taken from 1993ADFG groundfish surveys off the Alaska Peninsula and Kodiak Island. Central and eastern 
GOA model strata sea star densities were taken from Feder and Jewett 1986, which reported the results of Northern 
GOA surveys conducted in the 1970s which were designed to estimate biomass of benthic epifauna and infauna. 
Using older estimates from an invertebrate specific survey increased the biomass estimate for sea stars by more than 
100% relative to the NMFS GOA trawl survey estimates, where sea stars are incidental catch. Biomass in the AI was 
estimated by assuming an EE of 0.8.  
The P/B of 1.21 for sea stars was calculated for intertidal species by Zaika (1983) and Asmus (1987). Little 
information exists for consumption rates of invertebrate benthic predators in the model regions. Q/B for most 
benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups 
documented in Trites et al. 1999). Diet compositions were obtained from the Alaska-wide OCSEAP invertebrate 
studies summarized by Feder and Jewett (1981): identical diets were assumed for all three models. 
Biomass pedigree for EBS was 3 (direct sampling, but poor catchability) and 4 for the GOA (direct sampling 
methods had to be supplemented by literature values due to balancing issues). For AI, biomass pedigree was 8 (no 
estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was considered 6 (estimate from related species in other 
ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates 
were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Sea stars have different biomass estimates between systems, which may account for some difference in estimated 
mortality. In the EBS and GOA, trawl survey biomass estimates of sea stars exist, but may be of different quality 
due to differences in habitat and sampling nets. In AI sea star biomass is a top down balance so it’s a minimal 
estimate. The highest EBS sea star mortality is from the flatfish trawl fishery, but is <1%, as are all other known 
mortality sources. Sculpins and king crab cause the AI mortality of 73% for this minimal biomass estimate. Pollock 
cause most GOA mortality (39%). Sea stars eat more than 90% clams in all systems (diet was a common assumption 
between models). 
Brittle Stars is a composite group which contains all members of the class Ophiura, which includes both brittle and 
basket stars. The basket star Gorgonocephalus eucenemis has been reported in Alaska. Three families of brittle stars 
are found in Alaska, Ophiuridae, Ophiocomidae and Amphiuridae. Species include Ophiurida chilophiurina, 
Amphiophiura megapoma, Opniura leptocteni, O. maculata, O. sarsi, Ophiocantha normani, Ophiopholis aculenta, 
Amphiodia euryaspis, Amphiopholis pugetana and A squamata. Ophiurids or brittle stars (snake stars) have a well 
marked central disc and usually five arms. The arms are long and flexible, which allows them to move rapidly (by 
wriggling them) as they have no tube feet like the sea stars. The basket stars (Order Euryalida) have a similar 
185
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
     
     
   
 
  
  
   
  
 
   
 
  
  
  
  
     
 
  
  
  
 
    
    
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
  
   
 
structure to that of snake stars, but are usually larger. The arms are very distinct, highly forked and branched, and 
even more flexible than those of brittle stars. Snake and basket stars can be found in shallow water, and a few 
species can adapt to brackish water (unusual in echinoderms) but they are also found in deeper waters; brittle stars in 
particular can be dominant in many parts of the deep sea. Most ophiuroids are either scavengers or detritus feeders, 
however they also prey on small live animals like small crustaceans and worms. Basket stars on the other hand, 
filter-feed on plankton with their arms, for the most part.  
The EBS biomass estimated from the 1991 summer trawl survey was too low to balance the model (EE>5), so the 
top-down balance method was used with EE=0.8. It is not surprising that the trawls undersample these benthic 
invertebrates. Central and eastern GOA model strata brittle star densities were taken from Feder and Jewett 1986, 
which reported the results of Northern GOA surveys conducted in the 1970s which were designed to estimate 
biomass of benthic epifauna and infauna. This density was also used for western GOA model strata in the absence of 
other information. Using older estimates from an invertebrate specific survey increased the biomass estimate for 
brittle stars by more than three orders of magnitude relative to the NMFS GOA trawl survey estimates, where brittle 
stars are unlikely to be retained and basket stars are often fragmented. Biomass in the AI was estimated by assuming 
an EE of 0.8. 
The P/B of 1.21 for brittlestars was calculated for intertidal species by Asmus (1987). Little information exists for 
consumption rates of invertebrate benthic predators in the model regions. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from 
P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). 
Diet compositions were obtained from the Alaska-wide OCSEAP invertebrate studies summarized by Feder and 
Jewett (1981): identical diets were assumed for all three models. 
EBS and AI biomass pedigrees were 8 (no estimate available, top down balance) while GOA biomass was 
considered a 4 (direct sampling methods had to be supplemented by literature values due to balancing issues). The 
P/B pedigree was considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 
(growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to 
extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Brittle stars are top down balanced in EBS and AI, but had a biomass estimate from the GOA. Eelpouts and flathead 
sole account for most mortality in the EBS and GOA, as do other sculpins and eelpouts in the AI. (We note that the 
eelpout diet is all from the EBS, so this represents an indirect common model assumption applied to brittle stars). 
Diets were assumed identical between systems, with some benthic amphipods and the rest of the diet from benthic 
detritus.  
Urchins, dollars, and cucumbers is an assemblage of the echinoderms within the Echinoidea (sea urchins and 
dollars) and the Holothuroidea (sea cucumbers). Species found in Alaska include Echinacea sp., Strongylocentrotus 
sp (sea urchin); Family Clypeasteridae (sand dollars); Family Cucumariidae, and Pentamera sp. (sea cucumber).  
The EBS biomass estimated from the 1991 summer trawl survey was too low to balance the model (EE>20), so 
the top-down balance method was used with EE=0.8. It is not surprising that the trawls undersample these benthic 
invertebrates. Central and eastern GOA model strata urchin dollar cucumber densities were taken from Feder and 
Jewett 1986, which reported the results of Northern GOA surveys conducted in the 1970s which were designed to 
estimate biomass of benthic epifauna and infauna. This density was also used for western GOA model strata in the 
absence of other information. Using older estimates from an invertebrate specific survey increased the biomass 
estimate for urchins dollars and cucumbers by two orders of magnitude relative to the NMFS GOA trawl survey 
estimates, where small echinoderms are unlikely to be retained. Biomass in the AI was estimated by assuming an EE 
of 0.8. 
Rough estimates of P/B for western Bering Sea urchins averaged 0.61 as calculated by Banse and Mosher (1980) 
and this value was used for this functional group in all models. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from P/B by 
assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). 
Diet compositions were obtained from the Alaska-wide OCSEAP invertebrate studies summarized by Feder and 
Jewett (1981): identical diets were assumed for all three models. However, since macroalgae grazing was not 
quantified in these results, 25% of diet was assumed to be macroalgae. 
EBS and AI biomass pedigrees were 8 (no estimate available, top down balance) while GOA biomass was 
considered a 4 (direct sampling methods had to be supplemented by literature values due to balancing issues). The 
P/B pedigree was considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 
186
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
    
  
  
     
 
   
  
  
   
 
   
   
 
  
    
 
   
    
 
    
  
   
  
   
  
   
  
 
(growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to 
extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Urchins, dollars, and sea cucumbers have similar biomass estimates despite the sources being top down balanced in 
the EBS and AI and a biomass estimate from surveys in GOA. However, the EE was very low in the GOA (0.27) 
compared with a top down balance using EE = 0.80. Echinoderms are by southern rock sole in the GOA, followed 
by Dover sole and northern rock sole. More predation pressure is observed for this group in the EBS from yellowfin 
sole, northern rock sole, and commercial crabs. It seems possible that the existence of the large small flats 
community in EBS places more demands on this group relative to the other systems. Echinoderms are eaten by sea 
otters in the AI, and also to a lesser extent in the GOA. They are assumed to eat benthic detritus and algae in all 
systems. 
Snail (Class Gastropoda) includes all gastropods except for pteropods. Their life histories and ecology are very 
diverse, which allows them to fill in a number of niches. Within Alaska, the group encompasses both shallow 
(intertidal to 200 m) and deep species (200-300 m) such as Bathybembix sp. They may also be pelagic, such as the 
heteropods, which have a finlike foot and reduced shells. Whelks, false tritons (Family Buccinidae) and moonshells 
(Family Naticidae) are also found in Alaskan waters. While most gastropods are herbivores, many feed on organic 
debris and others are carnivores. Predatory snails commonly drill holes into the shells of their prey which include 
other snails as well as skate egg cases, worms, sea urchins and fish. 
The EBS biomass estimated from the 1991 summer trawl survey was too low to balance the model (EE > 1), so 
the top-down balance method was used with EE = 0.8. It is not surprising that the trawls undersample these benthic 
invertebrates. GOA biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. This procedure resulted in a 
biomass estimate two orders of magnitude higher than that estimated by the NMFS GOA trawl survey. AI biomass 
was also estimated by assuming an EE of 0.8.  
A P/B value of 1.81 for intertidal snails was calculated by Asmus (1987). Q/B for most benthos was calculated 
from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 
1999). 
Feder and Jewett (1981) report that Neptunea and Solariella snails feed on polychaetes, other infauna, and 
detritus in the eastern Bering Sea: for lack of information, diets of snails were equally proportioned between 
representatives of these groups and macroalgae.  
 Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency 
averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily 
qualitative data. 
Snails are top down balanced in all systems. Even though we have different ranges of predators between systems we 
get similar biomass density estimates by this method. In the GOA and EBS snail mortality is dominated by octopus 
predation, followed by bairdi and opilio in the EBS. In the AI Atka mackerel are a major source of snail mortality, 
followed by northern rock sole. Diet composition was assumed identical between systems. 
Hermit crabs (Family Paguridae) are Anomuran crabs which encase their abdomens within empty gastropod shells 
(Barnes 1980). Approximately 28 species of hermit crabs have been identified in Alaskan waters. Both polychaetes 
(annelids) and/or amphipods (crustaceans) have been found to be comensals with pagurids from the Alaska shelf, 
namely Pagurus aleuticus, P. capillatus, P. confragosus, P ochotensis , P. rathbuni, P. setosus, P. trigonocheirus, 
Elassochirus cavimanus , and Labidochirus splendescens. 
The EBS biomass estimated from the 1991 summer trawl survey was too low to balance the model (EE > 1), so 
the top-down balance method was used with EE = 0.8. It is not surprising that the trawls undersample these benthic 
invertebrates. GOA biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. This procedure resulted in a 
biomass estimate three orders of magnitude higher than that estimated by the NMFS GOA trawl survey. AI biomass 
was also estimated by assuming an EE of 0.8.  
A P/B of 0.82 is reported for hermit crabs by Volvenko (1995) and Dulepov (1995) and this value was used for all 
models. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average 
for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). 
187
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
    
  
 
   
  
  
   
  
    
  
   
 
   
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
    
   
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
Hermit crabs were assumed to consume infauna and detritus; for lack of better data, diet proportions were 
assumed to be equally split between clams, polychaetes, miscellaneous worms, and detritus in all ecosystems. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency 
averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily 
qualitative data. 
Hermit crabs are eaten by juvenile pollock, octopus, cod, adult pollock and halibut in the GOA. In the EBS hermit 
crab mortality is primarily from cod and opilio, while octopi account for 60% of mortality in the AI. Hermits are top 
down balanced in all systems, and share a diet composition. 
Miscellaneous crabs group includes all non commercial species of crabs, except for hermit crabs, which are a 
separate group (see above). Within Alaskan waters the group is an assemblage of some 50 species, including about 
14 stone crabs (Family Lithodidae), 14 spider crabs (Family Majidae) and 6 pea crabs (Family Pinnotheridae). 
Though not crabs per se, mud shrimps are also included in this group (Family Axiidae). 
The EBS biomass estimated from the 1991 summer trawl survey was too low to balance the model (EE > 6), so 
the top-down balance method was used with EE = 0.8. It is not surprising that the trawls undersample these benthic 
invertebrates. GOA biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. This procedure resulted in a 
biomass estimate three orders of magnitude higher than that estimated by the NMFS GOA trawl survey (which was 
also inadequate to balance consumption within the ecosystem). Biomass in the AI was estimated by assuming an EE 
of 0.8. 
The P/B estimate for misc. crabs in all models was assumed to be the same as for hermit crabs, 0.82, above. Q/B 
for most benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic 
groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). 
Miscellaneous crabs were assumed to consume infauna and detritus; for lack of better data, diet proportions were 
assumed to be equally split between clams, polychaetes, miscellaneous worms, and detritus in all ecosystems. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency 
averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily 
qualitative data. 
Miscellaneous Crustaceans is a group that consolidates most of the arthropods not found in any of the other 
groups. It is an assemblage of barnacles, ostracods, cladocerans, isopods, cumaceans and sea spiders. Cumaceans 
can be found either in the intertidal zone or in deep seas. They are generally smaller than 8 mm in size, but can reach 
up to 25 mm. As a rule they burrow in the surface sediments and become active swimmers in open waters at night. 
Sea spiders (or picnogonids) feed on soft-bodied invertebrates, particularly cnidarians, nudibranchs, and other small 
gastropods; larval pycnogonids often live as parasites within cnidarian tissues. Most are very small but some of the 
largest ones can be up to 20 inches across. Sea spiders have been found at depths of up to 2,850 m off Newport, 
Oregon.  
No biomass estimates for this group were available for any of the modeled ecosystems, so biomass was estimated 
using the top-down balance method with EE = 0.8. 
Dulepov (1995) calculated a P/B ratio specific to benthic amphipods of 7.4 (compared to pelagic amphipod P/B 
of 1.5) and this higher value was assumed to apply to miscellaneous crustaceans. Q/B for most benthos was 
calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in 
Trites et al. 1999). 
Miscellaneous crustaceans were assumed to consume detritus; however, detritus consumption was assumed to be 
split evenly between detritus and benthic bacteria, to make trophic levels comparable between benthic and pelagic 
secondary consumers (e.g. copepods). 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency 
averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily 
qualitative data. 
188
 
 
  
  
   
  
  
  
 
 
  
  
     
   
 
 
   
  
 
  
   
 
  
     
   
 
   
   
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
    
   
   
 
      
   
    
   
 
Benthic Amphipods groups at least 10 families of benthic crustaceans within the order Amphipoda: Caprellidae, 
Gammaridae, Ampeliscidae, Corophiidae, Eusiridae, Haustoriidae, Isaeidae, Ischyrocer idae, Lysianassidae, and 
Pardaliscidae. Benthic amphipods may be facultative predators when they compete for space with other organisms 
such as the northern sand dollar Echinarachnius parma. This in part, may explain alternative benthic communities in 
the eastern Bering Sea. In general though, benthic amphipods are scavengers and are important in recycling organic 
material (Schmitt, 1968). Studies on northern Bering Sea benthic amphipod show that high latitude species grow 
slowly, take 2 to 4 years to mature, reach a large size, and have long lifespans. Amphipod growth rates and molting 
rates appear to be decoupled, resulting in small adults at warm temperatures and large adults at lower temperatures. 
It is believed that at warm temperatures molting occurs rapidly irrespective of tissue growth, and that sexual 
maturity is reached after a fixed number of molts. Alternatively, gonad development is also temperature-dependent 
and may drive maturation, regardless of the number of molts experienced. Amphipods have linear or exponential 
growth rates, as opposed to the familiar asymptotic curve (they do not reach a maximum size). Consequently, 
secondary production is highly dependent upon the proportion of large individuals in the population as opposed to 
the proportion of young, which is the pattern prevailing in populations of species with maximum size. Production is 
correlated with standing stock but not the P:B ratios. This may be the case for other organisms with non asymptotic 
growth, and thus seems to be comparable only as an index of generation time (Highsmith and Coyle, 1991). Benthic 
amphipods are common in the diet of juvenile skates (Orlov, 1998). 
No biomass estimates for this group were available for any of the modeled ecosystems, so biomass was estimated 
using the top-down balance method with EE = 0.8. 
Dulepov (1995) calculated a P/B ratio specific to benthic amphipods of 7.4 (compared to pelagic amphipod P/B 
of 1.5) and this higher value was used in all three models. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from P/B by 
assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). 
Benthic Amphipods were assumed to consume detritus; however, detritus consumption was assumed to be split 
evenly between detritus and benthic bacteria, to make trophic levels comparable between benthic and pelagic 
secondary consumers (e.g. copepods). 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency 
averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily 
qualitative data. 
Benthic amphipods are a specific diet item in many fish food habits, so we expected the mortalities are different for 
this group between systems. However, large, top-down balanced, low trophic level groups dominate benthic 
amphipod mortality before the effects of groundfish predation can be observed this far down in the food web. 
Bivalves dominate mortality in the EBS and GOA followed by non-pandalid shrimp. Non-pandalid shrimp cause the 
most mortality in the AI, followed by bivalves and pandalids. Groundfish data accounts for small proportions of 
total benthic amphipod mortality in the GOA, with adult pollock at less than 3%, in the EBS with eelpouts at 2%, 
and in the AI with myctophids at the high of 6.7%.  
Anemones (Class Anthozoa, Order Actiniaria) is an assemblage of sea anemones, which are large, solitary 
cnidiarian polyps characterized by stinging tentacles surrounding an oral opening at the top of a tube-like body, 
which is attached to hard benthic substrate (including hermit crab/snail shells) at its base by a pedal disc (Barnes 
1980). Anemones are found anywhere from the intertidal zones down to trenches (to 6,000 m). Within Alaska, they 
are relatively more abundant in the Eastern Bering Sea, though are commonly found throughout both the Gulf of 
Alaska and the Aleutian Islands. Species occurrence is not very well documented, as many sea anemones are only 
identified as actiniarians on trawl surveys (some 80%). Some of the most frequently observed species include 
Liponema brevicornis, Meridium sp., and Uricina sp. 
For EBS biomass, the estimate from the 1991 summer trawl survey was used without adjustment. GOA Anemone 
biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata 
which were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this wide ranging group of invertebrates, the 1999 survey biomass from 
deep strata was substituted to give a better estimate of total population biomass. Biomass in the AI was estimated 
using data from the Gulf of Alaska as surrogate, keeping density depth specific, so shallow and middle have a higher 
density than deep areas. The density estimates were taken from the 1993 ADFG surveys around Kodiak for the deep 
areas, and around the Alaska Peninsula for the shallow and middle areas. 
189
 
 
    
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
    
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
    
  
   
  
  
  
  
   
  
     
    
    
  
   
  
There was no data on anemone growth rates so they were assumed to have a seasonal generation time, with a P/B 
of 1/year. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average 
for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). This detritus feeding group’s proportion of unassimilated food 
was assumed to be 0.4, rather than 0.2, the default for all other model groups.  
These species were initially assumed to be 100% detritivores; however, detritus consumption was split between 
detritus (60%), benthic bacteria (15%) and benthic crustaceans/amphipods (25%) to make trophic levels comparable 
with pelagic tertiary consumers (e.g. euphausiids).  
EBS and GOA biomass pedigree was considered 3 for anemones, as catch occurs in trawl surveys although they 
may be undersampled. AI used GOA estimates as a surrogate so the AI pedigree was downgraded to 5 (estimate 
requiring highly uncertain scaling factors/extrapolation). The P/B pedigree was considered 6 (estimate from related 
species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of 
species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Anemones have field-estimated biomass all three systems: from trawl surveys in the GOA and EBS, and from 
ADF&G survey from GOA transferred to the AI. They are not consumed by predators in the models, and consume 
only detritus. Even trawl surveys are likely to produce severe underestimates of density for these groups as they are 
designed to catch fish, not benthic structure forming invertebrates. We strongly caution that biomass estimates for 
these groups produced in these models should not be considered representative for analyses outside this narrow 
trophic context. 
Corals is a group composed of Anthozoan cnidarians that includes soft corals, cup corals, sea fans, hydrocorals and 
black corals. In Alaska, corals form gardens, as opposed to reefs like those in the tropics; these gardens can be quite 
extensive, as those found around the Aleutian Islands, and in very localized areas of the GOA. Main species in the 
AI include the bubble gum coral Paragorgia sp, Fanellia sp, Primnoa sp (gorgonians), Thouarella superba (white 
gorgonian), Stylantheca petrograpta (pink hydrocoral) and Stylaster sp (hydrocoral). Paragorgia is a long lived cold 
water gorgonian (gorgonians include the sea fans, bamboo and tree corals) (Wing and Barnard 2003). Within the 
Aleutians Islands, gorgonians prevail, followed by cup corals, hydrocorals and soft corals. They create a habitat that 
can be occupied by a diversity of life and provides shelter for numerous organisms, as in Adak Canyon; dead coral 
maybe covered with gooseneck barnacles, sponge, pink octocoral and bryozoan colonies. In the Eastern Bering Sea 
soft corals are largely dominant, particularly Gersemia sp. and Eunephthya sp., there is little of either cup or 
gorgonian corals. A similar pattern to that of the AI is observed in Gulf of Alaska, where gorgonians also prevail 
followed by cup corals, but hydrocorals here are the most infrequent instead of soft corals. The most common 
species are Callogorgia sp. and Primnoa sp. (found at 161-365 m depth), among the gorgorians and the cup coral 
Scleractinia sp. In terms of frequency, all corals are more numerous in the AI, except for the soft corals in the EBS. 
Within the AI, the highest abundance of gorgonian corals, was found in the vicinity of Attu and Kiska Islands. In the 
Gulf of Alaska the highest abundance areas were located off the end of the Kenai Peninsula and in Dixon entrance 
(the latter is outside the bounds of the current GOA model) (Heifetz 2000). 
Specific associations were observed between groups of fish and types of coral. Rockfish, sablefish, Atka 
mackerel, and arrowtooth flounder were rarely found with soft coral (compared to the other types), whereas gadids, 
Greenland turbot, greenlings, and other flatfish were found more frequently around them. The branches of Primnoa 
are used for suspension feeding by crinoids, basket stars, anemones, and sponges, mostly at depths greater than 
300m. Primnoa provides shelter for six rockfish species, as well as crabs and shrimp, and is therefore a key 
component of the deepwater ecosystem (Krieger & Wing, 2002). 
For EBS biomass, the estimate from the 1991 summer trawl survey was used without adjustment. However, the 
total trawl biomass of 6,500 t for the Bering Sea is probably an underestimate due to difficulty of sampling rocky 
areas. GOA coral biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. Biomass in 
the AI was estimated based on the average of the 1990-1993 NMFS survey highest density estimates for the Gulf of 
Alaska; highest density of coral occurred in the central gulf shelf (0.011); since this would not satisfy the demand in 
the ecosystem it was multiplied by 8, which is how much more bycatch of coral there is in the AI compared to GOA 
(7.8333, rounded to 8).  
Longevity of 100 years is reported for Aleutian Islands Gorgonians by Andrews et al. 2002. Assuming that this is 
the length of time for 99% of mortality to occur gives a P/B equal to the mortality rate of 0.046/year. Q/B for most 
benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups 
190
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
   
  
    
 
  
 
    
 
  
  
      
 
  
  
  
 
   
   
    
   
  
 
   
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
documented in Trites et al. 1999). This detritus feeding group’s proportion of unassimilated food was assumed to be 
0.4, rather than 0.2, the default for all other model groups.  
These species were initially assumed to be 100% detritivores; however, detritus consumption was split between 
detritus (60%), benthic bacteria (15%) and benthic crustaceans/amphipods (25%) to make trophic levels comparable 
with pelagic tertiary consumers (e.g. euphausiids).  
Biomass pedigree was 2 for GOA and 3 for EBS, with the difference between the greater presence of structured 
corals in GOA habitats sampled by the trawls. AI used GOA estimates as a surrogate so the AI pedigree was 
downgraded to 5 (estimate requiring highly uncertain scaling factors/extrapolation). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency 
averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily 
qualitative data. 
Corals also have field-derived biomass estimates in the GOA and EBS. AI density is eight times the highest area 
density for the GOA which was 0.011. We caution that these models are ineffective in estimating or validating coral 
biomass density estimates because there are almost no predators of coral, and even the survey estimates are based on 
trawl surveys where we don’t (can’t) trawl in areas of high coral density. They are not consumed by predators in the 
models, and consume only detritus. We strongly caution that biomass estimates for these groups produced in these 
models should not be considered representative for analyses outside this narrow trophic context. 
Benthic Hydroid (Class Hydrozoa) includes some 200 species which have been identified in Alaskan waters 
(O'Clair and O'Clair 1998). Hydroids are mostly colonial, either erect, tree-like, or prostrate encrustations on 
mollusk shells (live or dead), rock, or other hard surfaces. Tree like species are usually not taller than 15 cm. Some 
hydroids have alternating benthic and pelagic generations. The pelagic medusae are like tiny jellyfish. Reproduction 
in the group is varied and complex, with many species having a free-swimming planula larva that spends hours/ days 
in the water column before settling to the bottom (Barnes 1980). The family Sertulariidae, identified as a food item 
in Alaskan groundfish diets, has been identified as part of the epifaunal community of deep-sea corals (Henry 2001). 
On the west Kamchatka Shelf, a rich assemblage dominated by hydroids, bryozoans, and sponges was the favored 
habitat of young-of-the-year red king crab (Paralithodes camtschaticus), and hydroids were considered to be their 
main food. In the EBS hydroids are also part of the sessile invertebrate communities where young-of-the-year red 
king crab are found (McMurray et al. 1984, Stevens and MacIntosh 1991). In the SE Bering Sea, the hermit crab 
Labidochirus splendescens (splendid hermit) is typically found in a moon snail shell encrusted with the velvet 
textured hydroid Hydractinia sp. (Kessler, 1985). 
No biomass estimates for this group were available for any of the modeled ecosystems, so biomass was estimated 
using the top-down balance method with EE = 0.8. 
There was no data on benthic hydroid growth rates so they were assumed to have a seasonal generation time, with 
a P/B of 1/year. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded 
average for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). This detritus feeding group’s proportion of 
unassimilated food was assumed to be 0.4 (rather than 0.2 which was used as the default for all other model groups).  
These species were initially assumed to be 100% detritivores; however, detritus consumption was split between 
detritus (60%), benthic bacteria (15%) and benthic crustaceans/amphipods (25%) to make trophic levels comparable 
with pelagic tertiary consumers (e.g. euphausiids).  
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency 
averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily 
qualitative data. 
Benthic hydroids are top down balanced in all systems and are trace in everyone’s diet, so the biomass estimates are 
likely extremely minimal. Mortality of benthic hydroids is primarily from other sculpins in the GOA and EBS, and 
from king crabs in the AI. They are not consumed by predators in the models, and consume only detritus. Even trawl 
surveys are likely to produce severe underestimates of density for these groups as they are designed to catch fish, not 
benthic structure forming invertebrates. We again strongly caution that biomass estimates for these groups produced 
in these models should not be considered representative for analyses outside this narrow trophic context. 
191
 
 
  
  
   
  
 
    
   
    
    
  
  
 
  
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
  
    
 
 
  
 
  
 
   
   
    
   
  
  
   
  
 
  
    
 
  
   
Benthic Urochordata (Phylum Urochordata) or tunicates, includes ascidians also known as sea squirts, sea 
potatoes, sea onions and sea peaches. The body of an adult tunicate is quite simple, being essentially a sack with two 
siphons through which water enters and exits. Water is filtered inside the sack-shaped body. Sessile as adults, the 
larvae of many tunicates are free-swimming, and include a structural precursor to the vertebrate backbone, which 
disappears in the adult stage. Ascidians are most frequent in the EBS, though they are also found in GOA and AI. 
Common genera include Aplidium sp. Boltenia sp, Styela sp, Halocynthia sp. (Malecha et al. 2005). 
For EBS biomass, the estimate from the 1991 summer trawl survey was used without adjustment. Central GOA 
shelf model strata benthic urochordate density was taken from Feder and Jewett 1986, which reported the results of 
Northern GOA surveys conducted in the 1970s which were designed to estimate biomass of benthic epifauna and 
infauna. This density was also used for all other GOA model strata in the absence of other information. Using older 
estimates from an invertebrate specific survey increased the biomass estimate for benthic urochordates by two orders 
of magnitude relative to the NMFS GOA trawl survey estimates, where small tunicates are unlikely to be retained. 
Biomass density in the AI was also estimated using the above data from the Gulf of Alaska as surrogate.  
A P/B value of 3.58 for intertidal Ascidians was calculated by Asmus (1987). Q/B for most benthos was 
calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in 
Trites et al. 1999). This detritus feeding group’s proportion of unassimilated food was assumed to be 0.4, rather than 
0.2, the default for all other model groups.  
These species were initially assumed to be 100% detritivores; however, detritus consumption was split between 
detritus (60%), benthic bacteria (15%) and benthic crustaceans/amphipods (25%) to make trophic levels comparable 
with pelagic tertiary consumers (e.g. euphausiids).  
EBS biomass pedigree was considered 3, as reasonable catch levels occur in trawl surveys although they may be 
undersampled. For the GOA and AI, using literature results from non-modeled time periods, values of 6 were 
assigned to biomass pedigree (historical study not overlapping in time). The P/B pedigree was considered 6 
(estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over 
wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Benthic urochordata have biomass information from field surveys in the EBS, GOA, and AI. Over 90% of mortality 
is unexplained in each system. They are not consumed by predators in the models, and consume only detritus. 
Benthic urochordata represent potentially important ecosystem components where biomass is not well estimated. 
Even trawl surveys are likely to produce severe underestimates of density for these groups as they are designed to 
catch fish, not benthic structure forming invertebrates. We again strongly caution that biomass estimates for these 
groups produced in these models should not be considered representative for analyses outside this narrow trophic 
context. 
Sea Pens (Octocorallia: Pennatulacea) groups the benthic cnidarians commonly known as sea pens and sea whips. 
Age and growth estimates for the sea pen H. willemoesi have been based on the ring couplets in the axial rod which 
were considered as annuli. The ring couplet counts indicate growth in total rod length is slow at first, fastest at 
medium size, and slows toward maximum size, with an estimated longevity approaching 50 yr. They can form large 
colonies of over 150 cm. (Wilson, et al. 2002). Sea pens are most frequently found in the Gulf of Alaska, but they 
also occur in the EBS and the AI. Species identified belong to the genera Halipteris sp, Stylatula sp, Virgularia sp, 
and Ptilosarcus sp. Cod and pollock are most commonly caught with sea anemones, sea pens and sea whips 
(Malecha et al. 2005). 
For EBS biomass, the estimate from the 1991 summer trawl survey was used without adjustment. However, the 
total trawl biomass of 6,600 t for the Bering Sea is probably an underestimate due to difficulty of sampling rocky 
areas. GOA sea pen biomass is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates. Biomass 
density in the AI was estimated using the data from the Gulf of Alaska trawl surveys as surrogate. 
A 50 year longevity is reported for sea pens in Alaska by Wilson et al. (2002). Assuming that this is the length of 
time for 99% of mortality to occur gives a P/B equal to the mortality rate of 0.092/year. Q/B for most benthos was 
calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in 
Trites et al. 1999). This detritus feeding group’s proportion of unassimilated food was assumed to be 0.4, rather than 
0.2, the default for all other model groups.  
These species were initially assumed to be 100% detritivores; however, detritus consumption was split between 
detritus (60%), benthic bacteria (15%) and benthic crustaceans/amphipods (25%) to make trophic levels comparable 
with pelagic tertiary consumers (e.g. euphausiids).  
192
 
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
   
  
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
  
    
   
   
   
 
      
 
  
 
   
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
Biomass pedigree was 2 for GOA and 3 for EBS, with the difference between the greater catch rates of sea pens 
in GOA habitats sampled by the trawls. AI used GOA estimates as a surrogate so the AI pedigree was downgraded 
to 5 (estimate requiring highly uncertain scaling factors/extrapolation). The P/B pedigree was considered 6 (estimate 
from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide 
range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data.  
Sea Pens had biomass estimates in all systems but have high unexplained mortality in all systems. They are not 
consumed by predators in the models, and consume only detritus. Sea pens represent potentially important 
ecosystem components where biomass is not well estimated. Even trawl surveys are likely to produce severe 
underestimates of density for these groups as they are designed to catch fish, not benthic structure forming 
invertebrates. We again strongly caution that biomass estimates for these groups produced in these models should 
not be considered representative for analyses outside this narrow trophic context. 
Sponge (Phylum Porifera) is a varied group, well represented throughout Alaskan waters. In the Eastern Bering Sea 
however, they are poorly identified, as most are cataloged as “Porifera”. Information on species diversity is better 
for both the Gulf of Alaska and the Aleutian Islands. GOA dominant species include Aphrocallistes vastus, Micale 
loveni, Myxilla incrustans, Halichondria panacea while in the Aleutians the most frequent species are Halichondria 
cf sitiens, Polymastia sp, Tethya sp, and Micale loveni. Several sponges are classified by their common names only, 
these include club sponges, cat-o-nine tail sponges, and the hairy lemon sponge (Malecha et al. 2005). Sponges are 
important live substrates; the stalks of glass sponges (hexactinellids) provide hard substrate and act as habitat islands 
for deep-sea fauna (Beaulieu, 2001). They also seem to play some role in halibut habitat. When given the choice 
between bare sand or sand with 16% sponge coverage, halibut demonstrated strong preference for sponge. Sponges 
also tend to provide shelter from predation; their emergent structure, in otherwise low-relief benthic habitats, may 
play an important role in the ecology of some juvenile flatfishes. Removal of emergent structure by towed fishing 
gear and other anthropogenic and/or natural disturbance may influence patterns of distribution for juvenile halibut, 
as fish redistribute to less preferred habitat, and may decrease survival rates through increased losses to predation 
(Ryer et al. 2004). 
For EBS biomass, the estimate from the 1991 summer trawl survey was used without adjustment. GOA biomass 
is the average of 1990 and 1993 GOA NMFS bottom trawl survey estimates, except for deep survey strata which 
were only fully surveyed in 1999. For this wide ranging group of invertebrates, the 1999 survey biomass from deep 
strata was substituted to give a better estimate of total population biomass. Biomass in the AI was estimated using 
sponge data from the Gulf of Alaska. Data for the shallow and middle areas in the AI comes from the 1990 and 1993 
NMFS GOA survey estimates for the west GOA shelf (660.4 t). Data for the deep areas in the AI comes from the 
1999 NMFS GOA slope survey estimates for the west GOA (20011.43). 
There were no data on sponge growth rates so they were assumed to have a seasonal generation time, with a P/B 
of 1/year. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average 
for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). This detritus feeding group’s proportion of unassimilated food 
was assumed to be 0.4, rather than 0.2, the default for all other model groups.  
These species were initially assumed to be 100% detritivores; however, detritus consumption was split between 
detritus (60%), benthic bacteria (15%) and benthic crustaceans/amphipods (25%) to make trophic levels comparable 
with pelagic tertiary consumers (e.g. euphausiids).  
EBS and GOA biomass pedigree was considered 3 (proxy with unknown but consistent bias) for sponges, as 
catch occurs in trawl surveys although they may be undersampled. AI used GOA estimates as a surrogate, and 
additionally deepwater areas were not sampled, so the AI pedigree was downgraded to 6 (estimate not overlapping 
in area). The P/B pedigree was considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree 
considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due 
to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Sponges are top down balanced in the AI, but we used trawl survey biomass estimates in the EBS and GOA. 
Sponge mortality is high in the EBS due to opilio predation, while the GOA biomass from trawl surveys results in a 
very low EE because there are apparently no predators of sponge other than opilio. They are not consumed by 
predators in the models, and consume only detritus. Sponges represent potentially important ecosystem components 
where biomass is not well estimated by top down balance using EE=0.80 because they are not major prey of 
groundfish. Even trawl surveys are likely to produce severe underestimates of density for these groups as they are 
designed to catch fish, not benthic structure forming invertebrates. We again strongly caution that biomass estimates 
193
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
    
   
 
  
 
    
 
 
 
   
   
  
   
   
   
   
   
 
  
  
   
  
 
 
     
 
  
   
  
   
   
   
for these groups produced in these models should not be considered representative for analyses outside this narrow 
trophic context. 
Bivalve (Class Bivalvia) is a group that comprises an assemblage of all mollusks with two bilaterally symmetrical 
hinged shells, the second largest class of mollusks following gastropods. This group includes clams, mussels, 
scallops, cockles and scaphopods. Within Alaskan waters there are at least eight families of bivalves that are 
important as prey: Nuculidae, Nuculanidae, Mytilidae, Pectinidae, Lucinidae, Cardiidae, Tellinidae, Myidae. 
EBS bivalve biomass was averaged from benthic grab samples collected across the EBS survey area and reported 
by (McDonald et al. 1981). The estimate of 60 t/km
2 from these samples was extremely high, and to a certain extent 
was driven by a few stations that were reported in this study. However, removing these outliers resulted in biomass 
levels below the total consumption demand of the ecosystem (EE > 1), so the high estimate was accepted: bivalves 
are an important prey item for many species, and the muddy substrate of the Bering Sea shelf may support extremely 
high population levels. 
GOA biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8. This procedure resulted in a biomass 
estimate four orders of magnitude higher than that estimated by the NMFS GOA trawl survey, which is not designed 
to sample benthic infauna. Similarly, biomass in the AI was estimated by assuming an EE of 0.8. 
An estimate of P/B = 1.3/year for clams was obtained from Evans (1984), which is comparable to the value 1.47 
cited from various sources in the western Bering Sea (Aydin et al. 2002). Q/B for most benthos was calculated from 
P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). 
This detritus feeding group’s proportion of unassimilated food was assumed to be 0.4, rather than 0.2, the default for 
all other model groups.  
These species were initially assumed to be 100% detritivores; however, detritus consumption was split between 
detritus (60%), benthic bacteria (15%) and benthic crustaceans/amphipods (25%) to make trophic levels comparable 
with pelagic tertiary consumers (e.g. euphausiids).  
Bivalves for the AI and GOA had a biomass pedigree of 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). Due to the 
high variance of the EBS estimate, and the fact that it was measured in the 1970s, the EBS pedigree was considered 
7 (selection between multiple incomplete estimates with wide range). The P/B pedigree was considered 6 (estimate 
from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide 
range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Bivalves are represented by a biomass estimate in the EBS, and top down balances in the GOA and AI. All of these 
biomass estimates are uncertain due to both survey uncertainty and diet uncertainty within higher trophic levels 
feeding directly on bivalves. The bivalve EE estimate is 0.34 in the EBS, as opposed to the default assumption of 
0.80 used for top down balance. Identical diets were assumed between systems. Polychaetes are also top down 
balanced in the AI and GOA, while the EBS again has a survey biomass estimate. The polychaete EE is 0.22 in the 
EBS, as opposed to the 0.80 assumed by default. While top down balance is a good way to estimate minimal 
biomass, we might consider different default EE for lower trophic level groups if enough information on 
consumption could be gathered. Alternatively, we could improve biomass estimates for these important, diverse, and 
ubiquitous benthic groups to improve our understanding of ecosystem structure and function.  
Polychaetes (Class Polychaeta) includes most marine segmented worms. Polychaetes are well represented within 
Alaskan fish diets, and numerous families have been identified: Alciopidae, Aphroditidae, Chaetopteridae, 
Eunicidae, Flabelligeridae, Glyceridae, Lumbrineridae, Maldanidae, Nephtyidae, Nereidae, Onuphidae, Opheliidae, 
Phyllodocidae, Polynoidae, Sabellidae, Terebellidae, Tomopteridae, Trichobranchidae, Sigalionidae, Euphrosinidae, 
Syllidae, Sphaerodoridae, Goniadidae, Arabellidae, Orbiniidae, Paraonidae, Spionidae, Cirratulidae, Scalibregmidae, 
Sternaspidae, Capitellidae, Oweniidae, Sabellaridae, Pectinariidae, Ampharetidae, Serpulidae, Spirorbidae. 
However, groundfish prey items are often unidentifiable beyond class Polychaeta. For the AI, out of the 37 families 
listed above, only the first 18 have been identified among stomach contents. The bristles, or setae, of polychaetes 
project from side flaps called parapods. Polychaete feeding habits vary from detritus feeding to suspension feeding 
(filtering plankton and detritus from the water using feathery feeding tentacles) to active predation. On hard 
substrates such as rocks or corals, polychaetes may build temporary or permanent tubes, where they lead stationary 
lives by filtering the water for suspended food. A few polychaete species, such as scale worms, have taken up a 
symbiotic lifestyle, living in association with sea stars and limpets or other marine animals . Reproduction is 
194
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
     
 
 
 
   
   
   
  
  
 
    
  
   
   
   
   
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
   
  
  
   
   
 
generally through dispersal of gametes directly into the sea. Once fertilized, eggs develop into ciliated larvae called 
trochophores. These larvae live in the plankton, feeding on suspended algae, until they develop into juvenile worms 
that settle to the benthos to become adults. 
EBS polychaete biomass was averaged from benthic grab samples collected across the EBS survey area and 
reported by (Feder et al. 1981). GOA biomass for this group was estimated by assuming EE was 0.8; this procedure 
resulted in a biomass estimate three orders of magnitude higher than that estimated by the NMFS GOA trawl survey, 
which were insufficient to balance the model. Biomass in the AI was estimated by assuming an EE of 0.8. 
An average P/B of 2.97 for polychaetes in multiple ecosystems was calculated from sources cited in Aydin et al. 
(2002); this is neither species nor system specific. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a 
growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). This detritus 
feeding group’s proportion of unassimilated food was assumed to be 0.4, rather than 0.2, the default for all other 
model groups. 
Polychaetes for the AI and GOA had a biomass pedigree of 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). Due to 
the high variance of the EBS estimate, and the fact that it was measured in the 1970s, the EBS pedigree was 
considered 7 (selection between multiple incomplete estimates with wide range). Polychaetes were assumed to 
consume detritus; however, detritus consumption was assumed to be split evenly between detritus and benthic 
bacteria, to make trophic levels comparable between benthic and pelagic secondary consumers (e.g. copepods). The 
P/B pedigree was considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 
(growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to 
extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Miscellaneous Worm Etc. is a composite assemblage containing annelid worms (including oligochaetes, leeches, 
flatworms), sipunculids (peanut worms), bryozoans (moss animals), and brachiopods (lampshells). For the AI, most 
of the prey items in this group were either bryozoans (Ectoprocta) or marine worms (Echiuridae). 
No biomass estimates for this group were available for any of the modeled ecosystems, so biomass was estimated 
using the top-down balance method with EE=0.8. 
An average P/B of 2.23 for miscellaneous worms was based on the same information as for polychaetes; the P/B 
for all ecosystems was calculated from sources cited in Aydin et al. (2002); this is neither species nor system 
specific. Q/B for most benthos was calculated from P/B by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.2 (a rounded average 
for benthic groups documented in Trites et al. 1999). This detritus feeding group’s proportion of unassimilated food 
was assumed to be 0.4, rather than 0.2, the default for all other model groups.  
Miscellaneous Worms were assumed to consume detritus; however, detritus consumption was assumed to be split 
evenly between detritus and benthic bacteria, to make trophic levels comparable between benthic and pelagic 
secondary consumers (e.g. copepods). 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems) and Q/B pedigree considered 7 (growth efficiency 
averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily 
qualitative data. 
6.6 Plankton and Detritus  
Scyphozoid Jellies, or Jellyfish (Phylum Cnidaria, Class Scyphozoa) are relatively large gelatinous planktonic 
predators which capture zooplankton prey with stinging cells on tentacles extending from the hemispherical or bell 
shaped body (Barnes 1980). While identification to species can be problematic (Purcell 2003), common jellyfish in 
the EBS, AI, and GOA include Aurelia labiata, Cyanea capillata, Aequorea aequorea, and Chrysaora melanaster. 
These jellyfish can form dense aggregations in localized areas, and when they appear in high densities they have 
been hypothesized to compete with fish for zooplankton prey (Purcell and Sturdevant 2001, Brodeur et al. 2002). 
However, competition with groundfish could not be confirmed in extensive jellyfish diet studies conducted in Prince 
William Sound, AK (Purcell, 2003). Because biomass of jellyfish is highly variable and difficult to measure, we 
used relatively high density estimates from literature, even if they may represent overestimates for the entire regions 
covered by the models, to explore the maximum potential effects of jellyfish predation within these models.  
195
 
 
  
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
   
    
  
 
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
    
  
      
 
 
   
 
   
   
 
   
  
  
    
 
  
      
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
EBS jellyfish density was the highest density reported for the early 1990s (1994) from surveys of the EBS shelf 
(Brodeur et al. 2002). In the GOA, a jellyfish density estimate reported in Purcell (2001) was used. This was 
reportedly the highest density observed in trawl surveys of the GOA which occurred in 1980, which we used as the 
maximal estimate possible. Other jellyfish biomass estimates from Prince William Sound have been two orders of 
magnitude lower than the estimate we used, but were also observed vary by an order of magnitude on an annual 
basis (Purcell 2003). No information specific to the AI existed, so GOA densities were substituted there. 
The jellyfish P/B of 0.857 for jellyfish for all three systems was calculated from sources cited in Trites (1999) 
where P/B was assumed equal to the inverse of the generation time from Arai (1997); this is neither species nor 
system specific. The jellyfish Q/B of 3 for all three ecosystems was estimated from the summer ration reported in 
Brodeur et al. (2002).  
Jellyfish diets were transformed to % wet weight from the % frequency of occurrence reported for 1997 and 1999 
(then averaged) in Brodeur et al. (2002). This diet was used in all three ecosystems. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 4 for the EBS (direct estimate with limited confidence), 5 for the GOA 
(highly uncertain scaling factors from PWS to whole GOA), and 7 for the AI (multiple incomplete sources with 
wide range). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees were considered 6 (estimate from related species in other ecosystems). Diet 
estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Biomass densities of jellyfish were estimated by independent references in each system. Sablefish are the largest 
source of jellyfish mortality in the GOA, as are miscellaneous shallow fish in the EBS and Atka mackerel in the AI. 
Jellyfish diets were assumed identical in each system.  
Fish Larvae is a group intended to represent all planktonic life stages of fish, but this group is not quantitatively 
connected to modeled groundfish groups. Therefore, it serves primarily as a prey pool within the plankton for 
planktivorous animals. 
Biomass for this group in all models was estimated using top down balance assuming EE = 0.80. 
P/B and Q/B for this large zooplankton group was assumed equal to that estimated for euphausiids, because no 
data specific to this group exists. 
Diet for this large zooplankton group was based on that estimated for euphausiids (based on Mauchline 1980): 
25% copepods, 15% microzooplankton, 50% large phytoplankton and 10% small phytoplankton. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees 
were considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) 
due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Fish larvae are top down balanced in all systems. Their primary sources of mortality are schypho jellies in the GOA
 
(80%), and also in the EBS (80%), but Atka adults in the AI (80%). Note that the fish larvae are not connected to 
actual fish populations so jellyfish really don’t affect recruitment in the models at present.
 
Chaetognaths (Phylum Chaetognatha) includes arrow worms and the acorn worms (Hemichordata: Enteropneusta). 
Arrow worms range in size from 3mm to 12cm, are transparent or translucent, and are covered by a cuticle. All 
species are hermaphroditic, carrying both eggs and sperm. A few species are known to use neurotoxins to subdue 
prey. Sagitta sp has been identified in Alaskan waters. For the Aleutian Islands, they comprise common food items
 
for walleye pollock, Atka mackerels, Pacific ocean perch, northern rockfish, arrowtooth, spectacled sculpin and 
northern lampfish.
 
Biomass for this group in all models was estimated using top down balance assuming EE = 0.80. 
P/B and Q/B for this large zooplankton group was assumed equal to that estimated for euphausiids, because no 
data specific to this group exists. 
Diet for this large zooplankton group was based on that estimated for euphausiids (based on Mauchline 1980) but 
with half the consumption of large phytoplankton shifted to other zooplankton group due to chaetognaths large size: 
25% copepods, 15% microzooplankton, 25% large phytoplankton, 10% small phytoplankton, and 5% each 
euphausiids, mysids, pelagic amphipods, pelagic gelatinous filter feeders, and pteropods. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees 
were considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) 
due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
196
 
 
  
   
 
    
  
 
  
     
   
  
    
      
 
 
   
  
   
   
 
   
    
   
 
  
    
 
   
 
    
  
 
 
    
   
      
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
Chaetognath density in each system is driven top down from salmon consumption (where salmon diets were from 
the EBS) in the GOA, by pollock consumption in the EBS, and by myctophids in the AI. They have the same diets 
in all areas, which are adapted from a generic large predatory zooplankton from multiple NPZ model sources. 
Chaetognaths have the potential for multiple interactions with larval fish (eating fish larvae or competing with them 
for prey, see Brodeur and Terazaki 1999 for Shelikof Strait) but dynamics at this scale are not well captured by these 
models.  
Euphausiids (Family Euphasiidae) is a dominant group within the zooplankton in high latitude seas worldwide. 
Twenty three species have been identified in the NE Pacific, from northern California to northern Alaska (Kathman, 
et al. 1986); at least fourteen of these have been identified in Alaskan diets. Common Alaskan genera include 
Euphausia sp., Nematoscelis sp., Stylocheiron sp., Tessarabrachia sp., Thysanoessa sp. In the Aleutian Islands the 
most common species are Thysanoessa spinifera, T.inermis, T. longipes, Euphausia pacifica, and Tessarabrachia 
oculatum. 
Biomass for this group in all models was estimated using top down balance assuming EE = 0.80. 
The P/B of 5.475 was estimated for euphausiids in all three models using information from Smith (1991), who 
reported a range of 2% to 6% per day for spring-late summer T. inermis and T. raschi, during 1980-81 (warm and 
cold years), higher estimates include egg production females only. We used 3%/day for half the year. The Q/B for 
euphausiids was estimated by assuming a growth efficiency of 0.35.  
Diet for this large zooplankton group was based on Mauchline (1980), but modified to include microzooplankton: 
25% copepods, 15% microzooplankton, 50% large phytoplankton and 10% small phytoplankton. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees 
were considered 5 (general model specific to area). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of 
primarily qualitative data. 
Euphausiids are top down balanced in all systems, a situation which should be corrected with field data for this 
important forage species when/if it becomes available. In the AI, euphausiid biomass is driven by myctophid and 
squid consumption, while in the GOA capelin dominate euphausiid mortality followed by pollock, and in the EBS 
pollock are responsible for most euphausiid mortality. No source accounts for more than 25% of mortality. 
Mysids is a group comprised mostly by the Order Mysidacea, however unidentified malacostraca ( which includes 
decapods, amphipods, and isopods among others) are also within this group. Represented in Alaskan diets are at 
least 24 of the 48 mysid species reported for the northeast Pacific (Kathman et al. 1986). The most representative 
families are Mysidae and Eucopiidae, with well represented genera such as Acanthomysis, sp., and Neomysis sp. In 
the AI however, these are not main prey items, rather the most commonly consumed species are Gnathophausia 
gigas, and Meterythrops sp. Mysids are shrimp-like crustaceans, sometimes referred to as opossum shrimps because 
the females carry their developing young in a bulging pouch or marsupium formed by at the base of their legs. 
Females can carry broods of up 30 fry in their pouches, although 6 or 7 is the normal brood size. Young mysids are 
only released once they are well-developed juveniles. Mysids, cumaceans, amphipod and shrimps and can be found 
in swarms and these swarms are important in describing the geographic patterns of gray whales feeding from the 
Chukchi Sea to Baja California (Kim & Oliver 1989, Kathman et al. 1986). 
Biomass for this group in all models was estimated using top down balance assuming EE = 0.80. 
P/B and Q/B for this large zooplankton group was assumed equal to that estimated for euphausiids, because no 
data specific to this group exists. 
Diet for this large zooplankton group was based on that estimated for euphausiids: 25% copepods, 15% 
microzooplankton, 50% large phytoplankton and 10% small phytoplankton. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees 
were considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) 
due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Mysids are eaten by adult pollock and chaetognaths in the GOA, juvenile and adult pollock in the EBS, and by
 
myctophids, pollock and other sculpins in the AI. 
197
 
 
    
  
      
  
    
 
      
    
   
 
 
   
  
    
 
  
    
   
    
   
    
 
    
   
 
  
 
  
      
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
    
 
   
   
  
  
      
Pelagic Amphipods groups a minimum of 9 families which have been identified in Alaskan waters : 
Melphidippidae, Oedicerotidae, Phoxocephalidae, Pleustidae, Podoceridae, Stenothoidae, Synopiidae, Hyperiidae, 
Phronimidae. Within the Aleutians, the most common family is Hyperiidae followed by Stenothoidae, and only 3 
genera have been identified: Themisto sp, Phromina sp, and Primno sp. Hyperiids are primarily nektonic amphipods 
are mostly commensals and parasitoids of gelatinous zooplankton like medusas, salps, and coelenterates; gammarid 
and hyperiid amphipods, along with mysids, and euphausiids can prey on eggs and yolk-sac larvae of walleye 
pollock (Bailey et al. 1993). 
Biomass for this group in all models was estimated using top down balance assuming EE = 0.80. 
P/B for all three models was estimated from western Bering Sea information (Aydin et al. 2002). Q/B for this 
large zooplankton group was assumed equal to that estimated for euphausiids, because no data specific to this group 
exists. 
Diet for this large zooplankton group was based on that estimated for euphausiids: 25% copepods, 15% 
microzooplankton, 50% large phytoplankton and 10% small phytoplankton. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees 
were considered 6 (general life history proxy). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of 
primarily qualitative data. 
Pelagic amphipods are also driven by chaetognaths in the GOA, by pollock in the EBS and by chaetognaths in the 
AI followed by Atka mackerel. In the GOA Pollock are third with 13% of mortality. 
Pelagic Gelatinous Filter Feeders is a composite group which includes the salps and larvaceans (the only free-
swimming pelagic urochordates), and ctenophores. Ctenphores are also known as gooseberries, sea walnuts or 
Venus’s girdles. Both Salpa sp. and Thaliacea sp. are salps found in diets within the AI, but it is the larvaceans of 
the Order Copelata that are found most frequently as prey items. There are about 70 species of larvaceans; they can 
filter particles as small as 1 micron, which enables them to feed on coccolithophorid phytoplankton. Larvaceans 
reproduce sexually and are mostly hermaphrodites; they are small, typically not longer than 5mm across, but can 
reach up to 100 mm. They secrete a temporary gelatinous house (they lack a tunic) which they replace several times 
a day, as it becomes clogged with particles. Salps have the inlet siphon at one end and the outlet at the other end (as 
opposed to ascidians which have both on the same side). Rather than having cilia to move the water, they contract 
rhythmically to pump water through the body. They have no larval stage as they develop directly into adult 
organisms. They commonly form swimming colonies and are bioluminescent. Ctenophores are mainly composed of 
inert mesoglea, which causes them to have a low rate of metabolism. Many species are bioluminescent. Ctenophores 
are also known as comb jellies because of the eight "comb rows" of fused cilia. The ctenophores are hermaphroditic, 
and some species can reproduce asexually. Unlike cnidarians, with which they share several superficial similarities, 
they lack stinging cells. Instead, in order to capture prey, ctenophores possess sticky cells called colloblasts. 
Biomass for this group in all models was estimated using top down balance assuming EE = 0.80. 
P/B and Q/B for this large zooplankton group was assumed equal to that estimated for euphausiids, because no 
data specific to this group exists. 
Diet for this large zooplankton group was based on that estimated for euphausiids: 25% copepods, 15% 
microzooplankton, 50% large phytoplankton and 10% small phytoplankton. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees 
were considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) 
due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Pteropods (Order Pteropoda) are pelagic mollusks also known as sea butterflies, as their anterior portion of the foot 
has expanded to form swimming fins. Genera include Thecosomata sp, Lumacina sp and Clione sp. Within Alaskan 
waters, both Thecosomata and Gymnosomata are found as part of fish diets. Due to their specific environmental 
requirements, most single-species populations, as well as species assemblages, characterize various water masses 
and circulation patterns. Ecological biogeographers have mapped the limits of ranges of numerous taxa and have 
drawn broad ecological inferences. Being planktonic, both foraminifera and pteropods float passively, or nearly so, 
with currents (Herman & Andersen, 1989). 
Biomass for this group in all models was estimated using top down balance assuming EE = 0.80. 
198
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
    
    
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
    
 
      
   
    
   
   
    
 
   
  
   
 
    
 
   
   
    
   
  
P/B and Q/B for this large zooplankton group was assumed equal to that estimated for euphausiids, because no 
data specific to this group exists. 
Diet for this large zooplankton group was based on that estimated for euphausiids: 25% copepods, 15% 
microzooplankton, 50% large phytoplankton and 10% small phytoplankton. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees 
were considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species). Diet estimates were considered poor (7) 
due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Pteropods are driven by salmon returning in the GOA and then chaetognaths (which were also driven by salmon in 
the GOA), by chaetognaths in the EBS (driven by pollock) followed by salmon in the EBS, and by chaetognaths and 
Atka mackerel in the AI, followed by salmon returning. We may be underestimating other components of pteropod 
mortality because we missing pteropods in diets other than salmon due to sampling time and feeding mode of 
predators. We sample groundfish in the summer when pteropods are rare, and we lack diet information for forage 
fish which may consume pteropods.  
Copepods (Order Copepoda) are a major zooplankton group worldwide. Most Alaskan species belong to the 
superfamily Calanoida, which is not surprising as calanoids are the most successful copepods in colonizing pelagic 
environments. Several families are well represented: within the Family Calanoidae, common genera include 
Calanus, Neocalanus, and Mesocalanus. Within the Family Eucalanidae are the genera Ecucalanus, Rhincalanus, 
and Paracalnus. Within Family Pseudocalanidae are the genera Clausocalanus, Ctenocalanus, and Pseudocalanus. 
Family Aetideidae contains the genera Aetideopsis, Aetideus, Chiridius, Euchirella, and Gaetanus, and Family 
Euchatetidae contains genus Euchaeta. Family Metridiidae contains genera Metridia, Pleuromamma, Centropages, 
Pachyptilus, Candacia, Epilabidocera, and Acartia. Superfamily Harpacticoida contains genera Oncaea, Corycaeus, 
Oithona, and Copepoda monstrilloida, and Superfamily Caligoida is also found in Alaska. Though the list of species 
is extensive, within the Aleutians, only a few of these species have been found as prey, namely: Candacia 
columbiae, Candacia sp, Neocalanus cristatus. Though the list of species is extensive, within the Aleutians, only a 
few of these species have been found as prey, namely: Candacia columbiae, Candacia sp, Neocalanus cristatus. 
Biomass for this group in all models was estimated using top down balance assuming EE=0.80.  
P/B of 6 for all three models was derived from the upper range reported in Trites et al. (1999). The Q/B of 27.74 
for all three models was estimated from Cooney (1981), which is within the range of 33 reported by Dagg et al. 
(1982), 26.2 for Trites et al. (1999). 
Generalized copepod diets in all three systems were estimated from multiple sources (summarized in a NEMURO 
NPZ model, Kishi et al. 2007): 50% microzooplankton, 25% large phytoplankton and 25% small phytoplankton. 
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B pedigree was 
considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species) in all three models. The Q/B pedigree was 5 
(general model specific to area) for the EBS model, and 6 (same group from neighboring system) for the GOA and 
AI models. Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Copepods are top down balanced in all systems. Their mortality is primarily from euphausiids in the GOA, from 
euphausiids and pollock in the EBS, and also from euphausiids in the AI. The euphausiids and copepods are 
estimated to be double the density in the AI as in the GOA and EBS. Surprisingly, the GOA is estimated to have a 
slightly higher copepod density than the EBS, which may be realistic if we consider the reported importance of large 
oceanic copepods into the GOA coastal ecosystem (e.g., Cooney, 1986).  
Microzooplankton is a composite group of protozoan zooplankton which is intended to represent processes within 
the pelagic microbial loop.  
In the EBS, the density of microzooplankton was estimated as 45 from Olson et al. (2002) for 1999 in and out of 
a bloom. In the GOA and AI, no data were available to estimate biomass, so microzooplankton were top down 
balanced assuming an EE = 0.80.  
The P/B for microzooplankton was derived from Sorokin (1995) which gives a range of 0.2 to 0.6 per day; we 
used the low estimate of 0.2 which translates to 36.5 over a half year assumed growing season. The Q/B was then 
estimated using a growth efficiency of 0.35 (the same default value applied to all pelagic zooplankton).  
199
 
 
  
   
   
  
  
   
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
     
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
   
 
    
    
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
    
 
  
 
 
Microzooplankton were assumed to eat 70% small phytoplankton and 30% pelagic detritus in all models.  
Biomass pedigree for the EBS was 7 (multiple incomplete sources with wide ranges) and for the GOA and AI 
models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees were considered 7 (growth 
efficiency averaged over wide range of species) in all three models. Diet estimates were considered poor (7) due to 
extrapolation of primarily qualitative data. 
Microzooplankton are top down balanced in the AI and GOA, but a biomass estimate was available for the EBS. 
The EBS estimated microzooplankton EE is 0.225. In the AI and GOA an EE of 0.80 was used to estimate density, 
and we observe a lower density in the GOA than in the EBS. However, microzooplankton are estimated to have 
roughly the same density in the AI as in the EBS because of all the copepods in the AI consuming 
microzooplankton. In top down balanced systems copepods account for 68% of mortality (as engineered) but in the 
EBS they account for only 20%.  
Benthic Bacteria is a composite group of protozoan benthos which is intended to represent processes within the 
benthic microbial loop. 
No data were available to estimate biomass, so benthic bacteria were top down balanced assuming an EE = 0.80 
in all models.  
The P/B for benthic bacteria was assumed to be the same as that for microzooplankton, which was derived from 
Sorokin (1995) which gives a range of 0.2 to 0.6 per day; we used the low estimate of 0.2 which translates to 36.5 
over a half year assumed growing season. The Q/B was then estimated using a growth efficiency of 0.35 (the same 
default value applied to all microzooplankton).  
Benthic bacteria were assumed to eat 100% benthic detritus in all models.  
Biomass pedigree for all models was 8 (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B and Q/B pedigrees 
were considered 7 (growth efficiency averaged over wide range of species) in all three models. Diet estimates were 
considered good (1) because this group was designed to feed entirely on detritus. 
Benthic bacteria differences are entirely the result of different proportions of consumers resulting from different 
top down balances. Algae eaters are snails then urchins in all systems. All are top down balanced and have traces in 
groundfish diets. 
6.7 Primary Producers 
Algae includes all macroscopic, non-planktonic primary producers. Biomass for this group was estimated by 
assuming EE was 0.80 in all models. This likely results in a very low biomass estimate for algae in all systems, 
given that few groundfish graze on algae and that it is difficult to identify in stomach contents. However, nearshore 
areas where algae contribute greatly to primary production are proportionally small within the EBS, GOA, and AI 
models. P/B for algae was from general literature (Luning 1990), and was the same as that used in a model of an 
Alaskan nearshore ecosystem, Prince William Sound (Okey and Pauly 1999). The pedigree for algae biomass is 8 
(no estimate available, top down balance), and the pedigree for P/B is 7 (estimate from multiple incomplete 
sources).  
Large phytoplankton includes all planktonic primary producers above a system-specific size threshold; this 
category generally includes all diatoms and large dinoflagellates. In the EBS, large phytoplankton were defined as 
cells >10 micrometers, based on Olson et al. (2002). The distinction between “Large” and “Small” Phytoplankton in 
the GOA model comes from Strom et al. (2001). Large Phytoplankton are defined in the GOA model as cells larger 
than 8 micrometers, which likely includes diatom species. The AI model shares the GOA definition. Plankton 
communities on the GOA continental shelf have a mixture of coastal and oceanic species, with different groups 
dominating seasonally and spatially. In the pre-1977 time period, over 50 common phytoplankton species and 
species groups (>1000 cells/liter between April and August 1976, Larrance et al. 1977 as summarized in Sambrotto 
and Lorenzen 1987) were listed in shelf and coastal environments. Phytoplankton communities experiencing blooms 
were dominated by diatom species, as expected, but there was a succession in time and space of the species of 
200
 
 
  
   
   
     
    
  
 
 
    
  
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
   
    
  
  
 
    
  
  
  
   
   
 
  
   
   
      
   
 
 
     
   
  
  
  
    
   
  
 
   
   
 
 
diatoms that dominated during summer high biomass conditions (Sambrotto and Lorenzen 1987). Of the 50 groups 
listed, only 7 were present during the entire April-August sampling of Lower Cook Inlet (an area with localized 
upwelling that maintains relatively high phytoplankton standing stocks throughout the summer). One of these, 
Melosira sulcata, is a neritic species which dominated upper Cook Inlet throughout the period. In contrast, the other 
dominant diatom groups Thalassiosira and Chaetoceros were both abundant in Cook Inlet in April and May (the 
period of highest productivity), only Chaetoceros dominated in July, and by August the dominant group in Lower 
Cook inlet was “microflagellates” (which also were reported to dominate in oceanic regions of the GOA—see small 
phytoplankton below). These phytoplankters were reported to achieve over 10,000 cells/liter on some portions of the 
shelf, and were thought to be up to an order of magnitude higher in density than in oceanic regions (Larrance et al. 
1977 as summarized in Sambrotto and Lorenzen 1987). Changes in community composition alter primary 
production, as well as the production of zooplankton grazers which are more efficient at grazing certain size classes 
of cells. This is just a backwards way of saying that blooms happen both because stratification and nutrients become 
available for phytoplankton, and because zooplankton grazers cannot keep up with phytoplankton growth rates for 
one reason or another when growth conditions are favorable—hence the dominance of la rge diatoms during blooms 
demonstrated at several coastal and shelf sites in Sambrotto and Lorenzen (1987). These bursts of diatom 
productivity, even a single species of diatom in a coastal bay, accounted for up to 25% of total annual productivity 
of the bay. In the open GOA shelf where nutrient limitation in the surface layer is not found, bloom species might 
account for a larger portion of annual productivity, although larger grazers are seasonally abundant on the shelf to 
counteract this tendency. 
There is some information from the post 1990 period on GOA plankton community composition and its 
variability in space and time. Strom et al. (2001) describe GOA shelf phytoplankton community composition as 
highly variable along the transect they sampled; for example in May 1999, a station further out on the shelf was 
diatom dominated, while more inshore stations were dominated by small flagellates (these were all described as 
bloom conditions). A station adjacent to the diatom dominated station (~75 km away) and with a similar overall 
concentration chl a, sampled one day earlier, was dominated by small dinoflagellates. This is not necessarily in 
conflict with the idea that plankton species found on the shelf are distributed Gulfwide over longer timescales, as 
argued in the references from the pre-1977 period. While this post 1990 data is too limited to say much about 
community composition in general, it does indicate the potential for small scale and short term variability in 
community composition on the GOA shelf, and defies generalizations about inshore versus offshore dominance by 
diatoms during the high productivity season.  
In the EBS and AI, no system-wide estimates of phytoplankton standing stock were available to estimate 
biomass, so biomass was estimated using top down balance with an EE of 0.80. Primary production estimates were 
available for the GOA prior to 1977. These estimates of annual primary production for the GOA continental shelf 
indicate that it is more productive than any of the surrounding ecological zones (nearshore/estuarine, fjord, and open 
ocean). Sambrotto and Lorenzen (1987) summarize estimates of annual primary productivity from three locations on 
the continental shelf, which range from 300-330 g C/m
2y. (This compares with 150-200 g C/m2y reported for 
nearshore and fjord areas, and 50-80 g C/m2y for the oceanic region.) Assuming that C weight is about 45% of dry 
weight and dry weight is about 15% of wet weight (Valiela 1995), this converts to a wet weight production estimate 
of 4444 t/km2 per year. These estimates are based on studies which were conducted prior to 1977. Strom et al. 
(2001) demonstrate the spatial and (possibly) interannual variability in the seasonal cycle of primary production 
when they describe conditions on a single cross shelf transect in the central GOA. During April of 1998, 
phytoplankton standing stock measured as chl a varied from bloom (>6 micrograms per liter) in Prince William 
Sound to “oceanic” (<0.5 micrograms per liter and most cells smaller than 8 micrometers) at most stations on the 
middle and outer shelf. At the same locations in May of 1999, conditions were reversed with a bloom (2-4 
micrograms per liter chl a) observed over the shelf and very low chlorophyll inside Prince William Sound 
(“oceanic”). The P/B estimated for GOA large phytoplankton (below) was used to estimate the biomass density of 
7.8 t/km
2 . 
P/B estimates for EBS and GOA phytoplankton were derived from growth rates reported for each cell size class 
in each region. In the EBS, growth rates for large phytoplankton were averaged over areas with and without bloom 
conditions during 1999 (Olson et al. 2002) to estimate at P/B of 101.8. We averaged Strom et al’s (2001) growth 
rates for large phytoplankton in April and May over four sampling areas and two years (1998 and 1999) to estimate 
a P/B of 166.5. The GOA value was used in the AI.  
Pedigree for large phytoplankton biomass was 6 in the GOA (historical and single study not overlapping in time) 
and 8 in the EBS and AI (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B was rated 5 in the EBS and GOA (same 
group in historical time period) and 6 in the AI (same group in neighboring region).  
201
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
  
   
   
 
  
   
   
      
   
 
 
     
   
  
  
  
    
   
  
 
   
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
    
   
  
Small phytoplankton includes all planktonic primary producers below a system-specific size threshold. In the EBS, 
small phytoplankton were defined as cells <10 micrometers, based on Olson et al. (2002). Small Phytoplankton are 
defined in the GOA model based on Strom et al. (2001) as cells smaller than 8 micrometers, which includes 
flagellates. The AI model shares the GOA definition. Please see the discussion of Large phytoplankton for a 
complete description of the species composition and variability of phytoplankton on the GOA continental shelf. 
In the EBS and AI, no system-wide estimates of phytoplankton standing stock were available to estimate 
biomass, so biomass was estimated using top down balance with an EE of 0.80. Primary production estimates were 
available for the GOA prior to 1977. These estimates of annual primary production for the GOA continental shelf 
indicate that it is more productive than any of the surrounding ecological zones (nearshore/estuarine, fjord, and open 
ocean). Sambrotto and Lorenzen (1987) summarize estimates of annual primary productivity from three locations on 
the continental shelf, which range from 300-330 g C/m
2y. (This compares with 150-200 g C/m2y reported for 
nearshore and fjord areas, and 50-80 g C/m2y for the oceanic region.) Assuming that C weight is about 45% of dry 
weight and dry weight is about 15% of wet weight (Valiela 1995), this converts to a wet weight production estimate 
of 4444 t/km2 per year. These estimates are based on studies which were conducted prior to 1977. Strom et al. 
(2001) demonstrate the spatial and (possibly) interannual variability in the seasonal cycle of primary production 
when they describe conditions on a single cross shelf transect in the central GOA. During April of 1998, 
phytoplankton standing stock measured as chl a varied from bloom (>6 micrograms per liter) in Prince William 
Sound to “oceanic” (<0.5 micrograms per liter and most cells smaller than 8 micrometers) at most stations on the 
middle and outer shelf. At the same locations in May of 1999, conditions were reversed with a bloom (2-4 
micrograms per liter chl a) observed over the shelf and very low chlorophyll inside Prince William Sound 
(“oceanic”). The P/B estimated for GOA small phytoplankton (below) was used to estimate the biomass density of 
27.7 t/km
2 . 
P/B estimates for EBS and GOA phytoplankton were derived from growth rates reported for each cell size class 
in each region. In the EBS, growth rates for large phytoplankton were averaged over areas with and without bloom 
conditions during 1999 (Olson et al. 2002) to estimate at P/B of 110.9. We averaged Strom et al’s (2001) growth 
rates for large phytoplankton in April and May over four sampling areas and two years (1998 and 1999) to estimate 
a P/B of 113.4. The GOA value was used in the AI.  
Pedigree for large phytoplankton biomass was 6 in the GOA (historical and single study not overlapping in time) 
and 8 in the EBS and AI (no estimate available, top down balance). The P/B was rated 5 in the EBS and GOA (same 
group in historical time period) and 6 in the AI (same group in neighboring region).  
Large phytoplankton show remarkable similarities in mortality, but there was a standing stock estimate for the GOA 
and wasn’t in the other systems, so the EE for GOA is 0.28 while the default of 0.80 was used for top down balance 
in other systems. Small phytoplankton display similar consumption patterns to large phytoplankton, but again there 
was a biomass estimate for the GOA and not for the other systems. The estimated EE is 0.38 in the GOA but top 
down balance is with 0.80 which results in pretty high standing stocks already in the EBS. In the EBS the field-
based estimate for microzooplankton is higher than that estimated by top down balance in the GOA and AI thus 
increasing demand for small phytoplankton in the EBS. In the GOA, there were not “excess” microzooplankton as a 
result of the top down balance, so there is less demand for the (allegedly known) biomass of GOA small 
phytoplankton.  
202
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
7. Appendix B: Detailed Estimation Methods 
This section details estimation methods used for particular groups. First we detail detritus 
assumptions by species. Then, the appendix is organized by group, with marine mammal and 
bird methods first, followed by methods applied to fish groups. The designation of fisheries 
within the model is described in the final section of this appendix. 
7.1 Benthic-PelagicFlows 
Overall, benthic:pelagic flows were assumed similar between systems unless data indicated 
otherwise. The benthic:pelagic ratio in the EBS always favors flow to the benthic detritus 
whereas in the GOA and the AI the flow may be equally distributed or even favor the pelagic 
route for the non-benthic groups. See Table 4 in the main text for the order of groups referred to 
below. Flow partition among detrital pools was as follows:  
Table B1. Flow to detrital pools by model group, read as percent to benthic:percent to pelagic. 
Benthic:pelagic ratios EBS GOA AI 
Model groups from Transient killer 
whales to dogfish 
60:40 50:50 50:50 
Model groups from Juvenile pollock to 
other pelagic smelt 
ratio for EBS offal:benthic:pelagic 
2:58.8:39.2 50:50 50:50 
Model groups from Tanner crabs to 
miscellaneous worms 
90:10 90:10 90:10 
Model groups from Scypho jellyfish to 
microzooplankton 
60:40 30:70 50:50 
Model groups Benthic bacteria 
(and 
Algae for the EBS) 
90:10 90:10 90:10 
Model groups Algae, large and small 
phytoplankton 
50:50 50:50 50:50 
7.2 Cetacean Biomass 
Biomass for cetaceans was derived from stock assessment information for the entire North 
Pacific and partitioned to each model area using the best available data. This process is detailed 
below in tabular form, with one table for each of the EBS, GOA, and AI models. Pinniped and 
sea otter biomass estimation methods are detailed in the sections for each group in Appendix A. 
203
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
   
 
  
   
      
   
     
     
      
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
  
    
   
     
  
  
    
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table B2. Biomass for cetaceans 
Conversions Number of
	 Number in Body Weight Biomass EBS Number reference
	 Conversion reference animals
	 Area Time Misc. model (kg) (t/km2) 
Abundance split between EBS and 
Transient Killer ALU; 10% sighting rate of transient 391 Waite et al. 2002 75% 100% 10% 
	 29 2280 1.35E-04 Whales
	 vs. resident (Dahlheim pers. 
comm..) 
Percentage of NP deep area which 33000 Sperm/beaked whales 930,000 Rice 1989 0.11% 50% 50% 
	is EBS deep area; summer 265 1.77E-02 
occupancy; adult males 
Abundance split between EBS and Resident Killers 391 Waite et al. 2002 75% 100% 100% 
	 293 2280 1.35E-03 ALU 
Turnock & Quinn 1991; vessel Dall's Porpoises 24,119 Moore et al. 2002 100% 100% 20% 
	 4,824 62 6.04E-04 attraction 
Harbor Porpoises 48,161 Waite & Hobbs in review 100% 100% 100% --- 48,161 31 3.01E-03 
Too few sightings to be significant PWS Dolphins 0 --- --- ---
	 --- 0 79 0biomass 
Porpoise/Dolphin 72,280 Sum of Dall's porpoise, harbor porpoise, and Pacific white-sided dolphins 52,985 3.62E-03 
Angliss & Lodge 2002; mean of Angliss & Lodge 2002; 50% of estimates from 1999 & 2000 for Beluga whales 20,025
	 100% 100% 100% time spent in coastal estuaries, 20,025 303 1.23E-02 Bristol Bay stock + Eastern Bering bays, and rivers Sea stock in 2000 
Rugh et al. 2005; Rounded average 
	 Adjusted for animals migrating Gray Whales 22,284
	 100% 5% 100% 1,000 16177 3.27E-02 of estimates from 1992 to 2002
	 through and for seasonal residents. 
Humpback whales 394 Calambokidis et al. 1997 100% 50% 100% ---
	 197 30408 1.21E-02 
Fin Whales 4,051 Moore et al. 2002 100% 100% 100% ---
	 4,051 55590 4.55E-01 
Sei whales 10,000 Tillman 1977; range 7,260 to 12,620 1.87% 100% 100% Percentage of NP which is in EBS 187 16811 6.33E-03 
100 Angliss & Lodge 2002; Wada 1973;
	 Percentage of modeled area which Right whales
	 59% 100% 100% 59 30000 3.55E-03 100 in modeled area as a maximum
	 is in EBS 
Minke whales 1,813 Moore et al. 2002 100% 100% 100% ---
	 1,813 6566 2.40E-02 
Moore & Reeves 1993; Lowry 
1993; 10% of EBS in northern Bowhead Whales 8,200 IWC 1996; Zeh et al. 1995 10% 42% 33% 
	 113 31506 7.17E-03 Bering; 5 month winter residents; 
2/3rds of feeding outside EBS 
204

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
      
  
     
      
     
       
 
  
   
 
   
      
     
    
   
  
       
       
 
Table B2. Continued. 
Number of
	 Conversions Number in Body Weight Biomass ALU Number reference
	 Conversion reference animals
	 model (kg) (t/km2)Area Time Misc. 
Abundance split between EBS and 
Transient Killer ALU; 10% sighting rate of transient 391 Waite et al. 2002 25% 100% 10% 
	 10 2280 3.91E-04 Whales
	 vs. resident (Dahlheim pers. 
comm..) 
Percentage of NP deep area which 
Sperm/beaked whales 930,000 Rice 1989 0.11% 50% 50% is ALU deep area; summer 253 33000 1.46E-01 
occupancy; adult males 
Abundance split between EBS and Resident Killers 391 Waite et al. 2002 25% 100% 100% 
	 98 2280 3.91E-03 ALU 
Turnock & Quinn 1991; vessel Dall's Porpoises 302,000 Hobbs & Lerczak 1993 100% 100% 20% 
	 60,400 62 6.58E-02 attraction 
Too few sightings to be significant Harbor Porpoises 0 	 --- --- --- --- 0 31 0biomass 
PWS Dolphins 0 No sightings in area --- --- --- ---
	 0 79 0 
Porpoise/Dolphin 302,000 
	 Sum of Dall's porpoise, harbor porpoise, and Pacific white-sided dolphins 60,400 6.58E-02 
Beluga whales 0 Outside area --- --- --- ---
	 0 303 0 
Gray whale population migrates from 
Gray Whales 0 North Pacific to Bering Sea through --- --- --- --- 0 16177 0 
Unimak and False Pass 
Humpback whales 268 Zerbini et al. 2006; blocks 11 to 17 100% 100% 100% ---
	 268 30408 1.43E-01 
Fin Whales 45 Zerbini et al. 2006; blocks 11 to 17 100% 100% 100% ---
	 45 55590 4.39E-02 
Sei whales 10,000 Tillman 1977; range 7,260 to 12,620 0.21% 100% 100% Percentage of NP which is in ALU 21 16811 6.33E-03 
Angliss & Lodge 2002; Wada 1973;
	 Percentage of modeled area which Right whales 100 
	 6.75% 100% 100% 7 30000 3.55E-03 100 in modeled area as a maximum
	 is in ALU 
Minke whales 846 Zerbini et al. 2006; blocks 11 to 17 100% 100% 100% ---
	 846 6566 9.76E-02 
Bowhead Whales 0 Outside distribution --- --- ---
	 --- 0 31506 0 
205

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
    
   
 
 
 
 
     
  
     
    
     
 
  
   
  
   
   
   
 
  
     
    
     
   
  
      
      
Table B2. Continued. 
Number of
	 Conversions Number in Body Weight Biomass GOA Number reference
	 Conversion reference animals
	 model (kg) (t/km2)Area Time Misc. 
Transient Killer
	 10% sighting rate of transient vs. 174 Dahlheim 1997 100% 100% 10% 
	 17 2280 1.36E-04 Whales
	 resident (Dahlheim pers. comm..) 
Percentage of NP deep area which 
Sperm/beaked whales 930,000 Rice 1989 0.17% 50% 50% is GOA deep area; summer 399 33000 4.51E-02 
occupancy; adult males 
Resident Killers 174 Dahlheim 1997 100% 100% 100% 
	--- 174 2280 1.36E-03 
Turnock & Quinn 1991; vessel Dall's Porpoises 106,000 Hobbs & Lerczak 1993 100% 100% 20% 
	 21,200 62 4.50E-03 attraction 
Harbor Porpoises 31,012 Waite & Hobbs in review 100% 100% 100% --- 31,012 31 3.29E-03 
PWS Dolphins 26,880 Buckland, et al.1993 100% 100% 100% --- 26,880 79 7.28E-03 
Porpoise/Dolphin 163,892 Sum of Dall's porpoise, harbor porpoise, and Pacific white-sided dolphins 79,092 1.51E-02 
Too few sightings to be significant 
Beluga whales 0 biomass; tagging studies indicate that --- --- --- --- 0 303 0 
Cook Inlet stock stays in Cook Inlet 
Rugh et al. 2005; Rounded average of	 Adjusted for animals migrating Gray Whales 22,284
	 100% 5% 100% 1,000 16177 5.54E-02 estimates from 1992 to 2002 through and for seasonal residents.

 
Humpback whales 1,712 Zerbini et al. 2006; blocks 1 to 10 100% 100% 100% --- 1,712 30408 1.78E-01

 
Fin Whales 1,397 Zerbini et al. 2006; blocks 1 to 10 100% 100% 100% --- 1,397 55590 2.66E-01

 
Sei whales 10,000 Tillman 1977; range 7,260 to 12,620 1.10% 100% 100% Percentage of NP which is in GOA 110 16811 6.33E-03

 
Angliss & Lodge 2002; Wada 1973; Percentage of modeled area which 

Right whales 100 
	 35% 100% 100% 35 30000 3.55E-03 100 in modeled area as a maximum is in GOA 
Minke whales 105 Zerbini et al. 2006; blocks 1 to 10 100% 100% 100% --- 105 6566 2.36E-03 
Bowhead Whales 0 Outside distribution --- --- --- --- 0 31506 0 
206

 
 
 
 
    
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
  
 
7.3 Marine Mammal Production Rates 
A variant of applying a constant mortality rate as an estimate of PB, Siler’s competing risk 
model (Siler, 1979) as modified by Barlow and Boveng (1991) is used to construct a general 
model of survivorship for marine mammals. The model uses a minimum of information, a 
surrogate life table scaled by an estimate of longevity. Given these, a survivorship curve is 
estimated, from which averages of specific life stages (juvenile or adult) may be drawn. The 
equations as modified by Barlow and Boveng (1991) are as follows: 
l(x)=lj(x)*lc(x)*ls(x) 
lj(x)=exp[(-a1/b1)*{1-exp(-b1*x/W)}] 
lc(x)=exp[-a2*x/W] 
ls(x)=exp[(a3/b3)*{1-exp(b3*x/W)}] 
where: lc is the constant mortality risk experienced by all age classes; lj and ls are the 
mortality risk due to juvenile and senescent factors respectively. The parameters a1, a2, a3, b1 
and b3 allow flexibility in the shape of the functions. 
The values for the surrogate life tables provided by Barlow and Boveng (1991) are shown 
below. The authors advise taking these as starting values and then fitting to data if possible. 
When data are not available, it is recommended that those two life histories which encompass 
that of the species of interest are used to set a range of plausible values. Since the present case 
required an absolute value, rather than a range, the more conservative survivorship schedule was 
chosen and PB values estimated from there.  
Table B3.  Parameters of surrogate life tables: 
a1 a2 a3 b1 b3 
1 fur seal 14.343 0.171 0.0121 10.259 6.6878 
2 Monkey 30.43 0 0.7276 206.72 2.3188 
3 Human 40.409 0.4772 0.0047 310.36 8.029 
207
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
Table B4. Longevity, surrogate life table and ages used to estimate survivorship curves. 
Functional group Life stages Surrogate life table Longevity PB 
Sperm whale adult 15-60 3 60 0.046921 
Belugas adult 7-30 2 30 0.112092 
Gray whale adults 1-60 2 60 0.063365 
Fin whale adult 25-105 3 105 0.026676 
Sei adult 17-70 3 70 0.040015 
Right whale adult 20-85 3 85 0.032778 
Minke adult 12-40 2 50 0.051141 
Sea otter adult 3-20 1 20 0.116863 
Walrus mortality 5% 0.051293 
Fur seal juv 3-7 1 25 0.115826 
 adult 8-25 1 25 0.091245 
Steller sea lion adult 8-30 1 30 0.074004 
juv 3-7 1 30 0.122436 
harbor seals adults 3-30 1 30 0.082653 
ringed seals juv+adults 3-46 1 40 0.064447 
Larga seal juv-adult 3-35 1 35 0.082653 
wintering (ringed ringed=75%, Larga 
and larga) 25% 0.068998 
7.4 Marine Mammal Consumption Rates 
Consumption rates were calculated for marine mammal using body weights (kg) and individual 
allometric daily energy requirements (1000 KJ/day) from Hunt et al. (2000, Table 9.3) and 
estimates of the average caloric content in their prey (calories/gram) from REF. The individual 
allometric daily energy requirements were converted to calories per day and then to grams per 
day consumed using the prey caloric values. Percent body weight consumed per day was then 
calculated and converted to a yearly rate for Q/B. All numbers are presented in Table B5. The 
Q/B for the porpoise/dolphins group was calculated as the average of the Q/B values for Pacific 
white-sided dolphins and Dall’s and harbor porpoise. 
208
 
 
 
  
     
   
  
 
 
   
  
     
  
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
  
      
    
11.16 
6.61 
Table B5. QB marine mammals
 Body Weight 1 1000 KJ/day 1 PreyCal/g Cal/day G/day %Body Wt/Day Q/B 
Transient killer whales 2280 437.6 1500 104538939 69693 0.031 
Sperm/beaked whales 18518 2105.5 1500 502986144 335324 0.010 
Resident killers whales 2280 437.6 1500 104538939 69693 0.031 
Dall's porpoises 62 29.3 1500 6999522 4666 0.075 
Harbor porpoises 31 17.4 1500 4156713 2771 0.089 
Pacific white-sided dolphins 79 35.1 1500 8385093 5590 0.071 25.83 
30Porpoise/Dolphins – EBS Eastern Bering Sea model has Dall’s porpoise and harbor porpoise 
Porpoise/Dolphins – ALU Aleutian Islands model has only Dall’s porpoise 
Porpoise/Dolphins – GOA Gulf of Alaska model has Dall’s porpoise, harbor porpoise, and Pacific white-sided dolphins 
Beluga whales 303 96.3 1500 23005256 15337 0.051 
16177 1152.3 Gray whales 700 275274725 393250 0.024 8.87 
Humpback whales 30408 1849.7 700 441877688 631254 0.021 
Fin whales 55590 2908.3 700 694768275 992526 0.018 
Sei whales 16811 1186 700 283325370 404751 0.024 8.79 
30000 8Right whales 1552.3 700 370831343 529759 0.022 
Minke whales 6566 586 1000 139990444 139990 0.021 
Bowhead whales 31506 3136.3 1000 749235547 749236 0.024 
Sea otters  25 24.3 1500 5805065 3870  0.200 
Walrus/Bearded seals 1200 317.3 1500 75800287 50534 0.042 
N. fur seal juvenile2  49.53 
 fur seal adult N. 28 18.8 1500 4491161 2994 0.107 
East S.S.L. juvenile2  1500  39.83 
209

 
11.16 
27.47 
32.63 
30 
30 
30 
7.58 
6.52 
7.78 
8.68 
73 
15.37 
39.03 
 
 
     
    
  
  
   
24.07 
24.07 
17.44 
 Body Weight 1 1000 KJ/day 1 PreyCal/g Cal/day G/day %Body Wt/Day Q/B 
East S.S.L. adult 198 82 1500 19589107 13059 0.066 
West S.S.L juvenile2  1500  39.83 
West S.S.L adult 198 82 1500 19589107 13059 0.066 
Resident seals (harbor seal) 60 18 1500 4300048 2867 0.048 
Wintering seals (Spotted & ringed seals) 43 14.2 1500 3392260 2262 0.053 
1 Hunt et al. 2000; except where noted. 

2 QB calculated from using same growth efficiency as Adults

 
210

19.20 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
     
 
7.5 Marine Mammal Diet 
Both cetaceans and pinnipeds diets were estimated based on feeding habits compiled from 
multiple published literature. There are multiple references for each species and the information 
had both species-specific prey and large categories of prey such as “forage fish”; to 
accommodate all data sources we used the preference method. For multispecies functional 
groups, the diet for each species within the group was weighted proportionally to the biomass. 
References for each species diet are shown in Appendix A.  
7.6 Seabird Biomass 
Colony counts from the Beringean seabird database (maintained by the US Fish and Wildlife 
Service, USFWS) for 2002-2003 were assigned to geographical areas defined within each 
ecosystem (EBS, GOA, AI). We defined 10 seabird groups of which only fulmars was made up 
by only one species; the rest aggregated anywhere from 2 to 8 species. For each seabird species, 
the counts from all colonies within an area were summed and then converted to biomass by 
multiplying them by the average body mass for that given species. For those seabird categories 
which involved more than one species (e.g. unidentified murre, unidentified gull), the average 
weight of all species involved was calculated and subsequently used to estimate the biomass. 
Species specific biomasses were then summed to get an estimate of a given seabird group. The 
table below summarizes the counts and biomass information for each seabird species and the 
corresponding functional groups. 
Biomass seabird species x = Sum of counts in area * average body mass 
Biomass seabird functional group x = Sum of biomass seabird species in group x 
211
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
     
    
     
    
   
     
   
   
     
   
     
   
     
    
     
   
     
  
    
   
     
    
     
  
  
     
    
     
     
     
    
  
     
    
   
    
  
 
   
    
  
   
  
  
  
   
    
   
    
 
  
   
    
     
     
 Table B6. 	Summary of the estimated number and corresponding biomass of nesting birds by species in each 
ecosystem: Aleutian Islands (AI), Eastern Bering Sea (EBS) and Gulf of Alaska (GOA). Biomass 
is shown in t. Mean weight by species was taken from Hunt et al. 2000, Numbers from USFWS 
2003, Beringean Seabird Catalog. N/A values were estimated by other means, see appendix A. 
Common Name Species Weight (g) AI EBS GOA 
Sooty Shearwater 787 5000 100,000 N/A 
Short-tail Shearwater 543 745000 14,900,000 N/A 
Total Shearwaters 750000 15000000 N/A 
Biomass (in t) 408.47 8169.40 67.39 
Common Murre Uria aalge 992.50 7110 1349355 154269 
Thick-billed Murre Uria lomvia 964.00 43023 1856628 10540 
Unidentified Murre Uria sp. 978.25 28452 923620 1274552 
Total Murres (No. Birds) 78585 4129603 1439361 
Biomass (in t) 76.36 4032.56 1410.10 
Black-legged Kittiwake Rissa tridactyla 407.00 55317 617914 637699 
Red-legged Kittiwake Rissa brevirostris 391.00 12708 196143 0 
Total Kittiwakes  68025 814057 637699 
Biomass (in t)  27.48 328.18 259.54 
Cassin's Auklet Ptychoramphus aleuticus 188.00 105450 400 297893 
Parakeet Auklet 
Least Auklet 
Aethia psittacula 
Aethia pusilla 
258.00
84.00
 64613 
 2278250 
284490 
3250493 
57070 
20 
Whiskered Auklet Aethia pygmaea 121.00 6511 26 175 
Crested Auklet Aethia cristatella 264.00 873400 1978555 46050 
Rhinoceros Auklet Cerorhinca monocerata 520.00 30 0 8787 
Total Auklets  3328254 5513964 409995 
Biomass (in t)  459.25 868.86 87.48 
Tufted Puffin Fratercula cirrhata 779.00 230888 232577 1826505 
Horned Puffin Fratercula corniculata 619.00 87202 87308 758606 
Unidentified Puffin Fratercula sp. 699.00 0 0 0 
Total Puffins  318090 319885 2585111 
Biomass (in t)  233.84 235.22 
1892.42 
Northern Fulmar Fulmarus glacialis 544.00 510460 473517 440193 
Total Fulmars 510460 473517 440193 
Biomass (in t) 277.69 257.59 239.46 
Fork-tailed Storm-Petrel Oceanodrama furcata 55.30 2004400 7640 865226 
Swinhoe’s Storm-Petrel Oceanodrama monorhis 35.80 0 0 0 
Leach’s Storm-Petrel Oceanodrama leucorhoa 39.80 2257600 11200 489492 
Unidentified Storm-Petrel Oceanodrama sp. 43.63 0 0 0 
Total Storm-Petrels  5283198 966132 2235343 
Biomass (in t)  200.70 0.868 67.33 
Double-crested Cormorant Phalacrocorax auritus 1674.00 0 1928 3334 
Brandt’s Cormorant Phalacrocorax penicillatus 2103.00 0 0 0 
Great Cormorant Phalacrocorax carbo 2109.50 0 0 0 
Temminck’s Cormorant Phalacrocorax capillatus 1938.63 0 0 0 
Pelagic Cormorant Phalacrocorax pelagicus 1868.00 5106 19083 17298 
Red-faced Cormorant Phalacrocorax urile 2157.00 15886 14738 18250 
Unidentified Cormorant Phalacrocorax sp. 1938.63 8859 1815 12668 
Total Cormorants  29851 37564 51550 
Biomass (in t)  60.98 74.18 101.82 
Mew Gull Larus canus 403.50 0 254 2845 
Black-tailed Gull Larus crassirostris 533.50 0 0 0 
Herring Gull 
Slaty-backed Gull 
Larus argentatus 
Larus schistisagus 
1135.00 
1327.00 
0 
0 
961 
2 
0 
0 
Glaucous-winged Gull Larus glaucescens 1010.00 32767 36509 163343 
Glaucous-winged x Herring Gull 
Glaucous Gull 
Larus sp. hybrid 
Larus hyperboreus 
1072.50 
1412.50 
0 
0 
0 
9799 
0 
0 
Glaucous-winged x Glaucous Gull Larus sp. hybrid 1072.50 0 2 0 
Black-headed Gull 
Larus ridibundus 284.00 0 0 0 
Sabine’s Gull Xema sabini 191.00 0 16 0 
Unidentified Gull Larus sp. 1072.50 0 34 0 
Total Gulls  32767 47577 166188 
Biomass (in t) 33.09 51.95 166.12 
All Albatross 3090 1500 N/A N/A 
Biomass (in t)  4.635 49.52175812 67.38598265 
212

 
 
   
  
   
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
  
   
  
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
7.7 Seabird Production Rates 
A constant mortality rate was used to estimate PB of the different seabird categories. Thus: 
PB = Ln(survival rate) 
When there was more than one rate available, the average was used. The survival/ mortality 
values used to calculate the corresponding PB values for each seabird functional group are 
shown below. 
Table B7. Production. mortality and survival values for each seabird functional group. 
Functional group 
PB (or Z, 
mortality 
rate) 
annual mortality * or 
survival rate ** 
Resolution 
(taxonomic level 
rates refer to) 
Source 
Shearwater 0.1 0.1* manx shearwater Furness, 1987  
Murre 0.169488 0.75-0.95** order level Schreiber and Burger, 2002 
Kittiwake 0.075804 
0.926** Middleton Is. AK; 
0.930** St George Bering Sea; 
0.925** Shoup Bay AK 
black-legged 
kittiwake Schreiber and Burger, 2002 
Auklet 0.169488 0.75-0.95** 
order level 
contains auks 
(not auklets) Schreiber and Burger, 2002 
Puffin 0.04 0.04* Puffins Furness, 1987  
Fulmar 0.055 0.055* Fulmar Furness, 1987  
Storm Petrel 0.12 0.12* storm petrel Furness, 1987  
Cormorants 0.158727 0.80-0.91** order level Schreiber and Burger, 2002 
Gulls 0.165782 0.74-0.97** order level Schreiber and Burger, 2002 
Albatross Jaeger 0.067566 0.91-0.96** order level Schreiber and Burger, 2002 
7.8 Seabird Consumption Rates and Diets 
Seabird consumption rates were taken from Hunt et al. (2000). Seabird diets were estimated 
based on the diets used by Hunt et al. (2000). Diets for one species were weighted according to 
its proportion within all three systems (EBS, AI and GOA together). When more than one diet 
was available for any given species, the diets were averaged and subsequently weighted by the 
corresponding proportion. Sometimes only the main species diets were used to calculate the final 
diet for the whole group. Such is the case of the storm petrels, gulls and cormorants. Because the 
categories used by Hunt et al. (2000) are much broader than those used as functional groups in 
the ecosystem models, the final percentage for any given food category used by Hunt et al. 
(2000) was distributed –using the Preference choice for diet type- among all functional groups 
that fell in such category. Whenever there was a stated preferred prey, an arbitrary higher 
percentage would be fixed to that prey, the remaining portion being allocated equally among the 
rest of the functional groups that fell in such category. Small percentages, usually those assigned 
to “unknown”, were lumped with another category. Details are shown in Table B8. 
213
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
   
   
   
 
   
        
  
   
   
  
    
   
       
  
  
   
   
  
  
   
       
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
 
   
      
   
  
       
       
  
  
   
     
       
 
        
   
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
   
    
  Table B8. Summarized basic table used for seabird diets. 
Proportion of sp. in
all 3 systems 
Functional group/ 
species 
Miscellaneous 
inverts ~4kj/g
Gelatinous zoop ~ 
3 kj/g
Crustacean zoop 
~4kj/g
Small cephal ~3.5 
kj/g
large cephal.~4
kj/g
Fish low ~3 kj/g
Fish med~5 kj/g
Fish High~7 kj/g
Bird & mammals 
~7 kj/g
Carrion Offal & 
discards ~5kj/g
Unknown ~5kj/g
Preferred prey 
Murres  
45. 	 Common + 0 3.7 1.2 56.2 39 0 0 0 
55. Thick-billed 0.1 + 17.6 5.3 39.6 36 0.4 0 1 
W Common 0 1.67 0.54 0 25.29 17.55 0 0 0 0 
W Thick-billed 0.06  9.68 2.92 0 21.78 19.8 0.22 0 0 0.55 
Sum 0.06 0.0 11.35 3.46 0 47.07 37.35 0.22 0 0 0.55 
Kittiwakes 
87.22 	 Black-legged 0 + 7.3 1 45.3 32.5 11.3  0 2.6 
12.78 	 Red-legged + + 1 1.9  23.8 14.5 57.2 0 1.6 
Black-legged 2.2 0 11.2 .1 1.2 79.9 0 0 0 5.4 
W Black-legged 0.96 0 8.07 0.48 20.28 49.02 4.93 0 0 3.49 
W Red-legged 0.13 0.24 0 3.04 1.85 7.31 0 0 0.2 
Sum 0.96 0. 8.2 0.72 0. 23.32 50.87 12.24 0 0.0 3.69 
Puffins 
24.53 	 Horned 3.9 0 11.1 0.7 0 40.7 39 0 0 0 4.6 Hexagrammos 
75.47 	 Tufted 11.90 0 3.4 1.7 0 17 64.4 0 0 0 1.6 Theragra 
Horned 0.1 0 0.7 0 1.2 0.1 97.5 0 0 0 0.4 Mallotus 
Tufted 0.2 0 11.2 0 7.8 0.6 80.2 0 0 0 0 Mallotus 
W Horned 0.49 0 1.45 0.09 0.15 5 16.74 0 0 0 0.61 
W Tufted 4.57 0 5.51 0.64 2.94 6.64 54.57 0 0 0 0.6 
Sum 5.06 0.0 6.96 0.73 3.09 11.65 71.31 0 0 0.0 1.22 
Auklets 
7.42 Parakeet auklet 23.5 + 48.5 0.4 0 4.5 22.1 0 0 0 1 
54.04 Crested + + 98.3 0 0 0 0.8 0 0 0 0.90 
32.8 Least + + 92.7 0 0 0.3 0.4 0 0 0 6.6 
5.36 Cassin's 0.1 0 94.2 1.1 0 0 4.6 0 0 0 0 Calanoid 
Parakeet 0 0 58.6 0 0 0 41.4 0 0 0 0 Euphausiidae 
Crested 0 0 99.90 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 Acanthomysis 
0.32 Rhinoceros 0 0 0 1.2 0 0 94.5 1.5 0 0 2.8 
W Parakeet 0.87 0 3.97 0.01 0 0.17 2.36 0 0 0 0.04 Misc fish 
W Crested 0 0 53.55 0 0 0 0.22 0 0 0 0.24 
W Least 0 0 30.41 0 0 0.1 0.13 0 0 0 2.16 
W Cassin's 0.01 0 5.05 0.06 0 0 0.25 0 0 0 0 
Sum 0.88 0.0 92.98 0.07 0 0.27 2.95 0 0 0.0 2.45 
med+unknown 5.39 
Storm-Petrel 
59.17 	 Fork-tailed 1.3 0.0 32 60.7 1.7 4.2 0 0 0.0 0.1 Euphausiidae 
1.4 misc inverts and unknown 
Fulmars 
100 Northern 0 0 6 21.2 0 60.6 12.1 0 0 0.1 Theragra 
Northern 0.2 0 0.90 96 0 0.6 2.2 0 0.1 0 0 Gondatidae 
Sum 0.1 0 3.45 58.6 0 30.6 7.15 0 0.1 0 0.05 
bird_mammal+unknown 0.15 
Gulls 
93.99 Glaucous-winged 1.6 0 0.90 0 0.2 96.2 0 + + 1.1 Misc. 
Gull unkmown to discards 
Cormorants* 
54.57 
40.37 
Red-faced 
Pelagic 
0 
0.2 
0 
0 
0 
0.6 
0 
0 
4 
0.6 
93 
98.6 
2 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1 
0 
Ammodytes 
hexapterus 
Red-faced 0.1 0 15.2 0 15.4 68.90 0 0 0.4 
W Red-faced 0.03 0 4.37 0 5.58 46.53 0.57 0 0 0.4 Misc. fish 
W Pelagic 0.09 0 0.26 0 0 0.26 41.93 0 0 0 0 
Sum 0.11 0.0 4.62 0 0.0 5.83 88.46 0.57 0 0.0 0.4 
*Diet for the double crested cormorant (5.06% of all cormorants) was not incorporated; red-faced and pelagic cormorant’s diets were 
proportioned to add up to 100% instead of 94.94% 
214
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
7.9 Fish Biomass 
The National Marine Fisheries Service Alaska Fisheries Science Center conducts trawl surveys 
in all three major ecosystems: the Eastern Bering Sea, the Aleutian Islands, and the Gulf of 
Alaska. All of these surveys take place during the summer season, starting between late May and 
early June and ending in late July or early August. Because each ecosystem has fundamentally 
different physical characteristics, the trawl survey methods vary slightly between areas. In 
addition, the length of the survey time series and the frequency of surveys differ between areas. 
In this section, we describe the major characteristics of the bottom trawl surveys of the EBS, AI, 
and GOA which provide much of the input information for the corresponding ecosystem models.  
The EBS region has two separate trawl surveys, one for the shelf and the other for the slope. We 
first describe the shelf survey and then the slope survey. The EBS shelf survey is the longest 
running continuous trawl survey in Federal waters off Alaska; it has been conducted annually 
since 1982. The shelf survey design has fixed stations on a grid covering six sampling strata, and 
it ranges in depth from 50 m to 200 m. Because the EBS shelf survey is a combined shellfish and 
groundfish survey, the station density increases in areas of high historical crab abundance around 
the Pribilof Islands. Survey tows at each station last 30 minutes, which often results in an excess 
of catch which must then be subsampled on deck. The overall area covered by the survey is 
495,000 square km (Fig. 2a). The EBS shelf survey uses a different net from all the other surveys 
we will describe. Because the EBS shelf is very regular and flat, the survey net has no protective 
roller gear on the footrope. This allows more complete sampling of benthic animals, including 
commercial crabs, relative to the nets used in the more rugged habitats found on the EBS slope 
(and in the AI and GOA regions). The EBS slope survey has been intermittent historically (1979, 
1981-82, 1985, 1988, 1991), but was standardized formally in 2000 and has been conducted 
biennially since then. In contrast to the EBS shelf survey, the EBS slope survey uses a stratified 
random design, with depth and longitudinal strata extending from 200 m to 1000 m depth. This 
survey covers 32,723 square km of relatively steep and narrow slope habitat (Fig. 2a). The EBS 
slope survey uses a net with roller gear on the footrope, which protects the net from rough 
bottom by raising it slightly. While this allows sampling in rougher areas, it does so at the cost of 
reducing effective sampling of benthic animals. The EBS slope survey and the AI and GOA 
trawl surveys which use a similar net now tow a small net under the regular net to examine 
benthic invertebrates which may not be effectively sampled by the survey net, but this is for 
qualitative purposes only. Therefore, the EBS slope, AI, and GOA trawl surveys are groundfish 
oriented surveys, and are not used in shellfish assessments.  
The AI and GOA regions have similar trawl survey methods which will be discussed together. 
Both of these areas were surveyed triennially between 1983 and 1999, in alternating years (with 
a West Coast survey in the intervening third year of each cycle). However, the order of surveys 
were changed partway through the series. Therefore, the AI surveys occurred in 1980, 1983, 
1986, 1991, 1994, and 1997, while the GOA surveys occurred in 1984, 1987, 1990, 1993, 1996, 
and 1999. Starting in 2000, these surveys went on a biennial schedule with the AI surveyed on 
even numbered years (the same years as the EBS slope survey) and the GOA on the odd 
numbered years. Both surveys use a stratified random design for selecting stations between 50 m 
215
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
and 500 m depth, and each station is towed for 15 minutes. Coverage of depths exceeding 500 m 
is rare in the AI, but the GOA survey has extended as far as 1000 m depth in some years (1984, 
1987, and 1999). The maximum depth covered in the GOA was 700 m in 2003, and 500 m in 
1990-1996 and 2001. The area covered by each survey is generally 57,000 square km in the AI 
and 291,840 square km in the GOA (Fig. 2b and 2c). However, in 1987 and 2001 portions of the 
eastern GOA were not surveyed. As described above, the nets used for these surveys have roller 
gear on the footrope. These nets are designed to maximize sampling opportunities in these 
rougher habitats, but as described above may be less effective at sampling benthic invertebrates 
than the EBS shelf survey net. 
Regardless of differences in design, the data collected aboard each of these surveys is the same. 
For each tow, the catch is sorted to species and the weight and number of each species caught is 
recorded. For commercially important species, length frequencies by sex are recorded. Other 
biological collections include otoliths for ageing, gonads for maturity and fecundity studies, 
samples for genetic work or other research, and of course, stomach samples for food habits 
studies. 
7.10 Fish Production Rates 
Production/biomass (P/B) and consumption/biomass (Q/B) for a given population depend 
heavily on the age structure, and thus mortality rate of that population. For a population with an 
equilibrium age structure, assuming exponential mortality and Von Bertalanffy growth, P/B is in 
fact equal to total mortality Z (Allen 1971) and Q/B is equal to (Z+3K)/A, where K is Von 
Bertalanffy’s K, and A is a scaling factor for indigestible proportions of prey (Aydin 2004). If a 
population is not in equilibrium, P/B may differ substantially from Z although it will still be a 
function of mortality. 
For the Bering Sea, Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska ECOPATH models, P/B and Q/B 
values depend on available mortality rates, which were taken from estimates or literature values 
used in single-species models of the region. It is noted that the single-species model assumptions 
of constant natural mortality are violated by definition in multispecies modeling; therefore, these 
estimates should be seen as “priors” to be input into the ECOPATH balancing procedures or 
other parameter-fitting (e.g. Bayesian) techniques. 
Several methods were used to calculate P/B, depending on the level of data available. Proceeding 
from most data to least data, the following methods were used: 
1.	 If a population is not in equilibrium, total production P for a given age class over the 
course of a year can be approximated as (N
at·ΔWat), where Nat is the number of fish of a 
given age class in a given year, exponentially averaged to account for mortality 
throughout the year, and ΔWat is the change in body weight of that age class over that 
year. For a particular stock, if weight-at-age data existed for multiple years, and stock-
assessment reconstructed numbers-at-age were also available, production was calculated 
by summing this equation over all assessed age classes. Walleye pollock P/B for both the 
EBS and GOA were calculated using this method: examining the components of this sum 
over the years showed that numbers-at-age variation was responsible for considerably 
more variability in overall P/B than was weight-at-age variation.  
216
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
2.	 If stock assessment numbers-at-age were available, but a time series of weight-at-age was 
not available and some weight-at-age data was available, the equation in (1), above, was 
used, however, the change in body weight over time was estimated using fits to the 
generalized Von Bertalanffy equations described in the consumption section, below. 
3.	 If no stock assessment of numbers-at-age was available, the population was assumed to 
be in equilibrium, so that P/B was taken to equal Z. In cases for many nontarget species, 
estimates of Z were not available so estimates of M were taken from conspecifics with 
little assumed fishing mortality for this particular calculation.  
7.11 Fish Consumption Rates 
There are multiple methods for estimating the consumption rates (Q/B, consumption per unit 
biomass) for fish. Four methods were considered in the construction of these models: 
bioenergetics models (based on laboratory and field experiments), allometric fitting to weight-at­
age data (e.g. Essington et al. 2001), evacuation rate calculation from field stomach contents data 
(e.g. MAXIMS, Jarre et al. 1991) and empirical methods based on morphological characteristics 
(Pauly 1986). One goal in selecting methods was to choose options which could be used 
consistently in all three ecosystem models and thus provide reasonable bases for comparison. 
It was determined that insufficient data existed for the application of bioenergetics models or 
evacuation rate calculations; while models existed for a very limited number species, input data 
such as foraging rates and water temperature specific to the Alaska region were not consistently 
available, and lack of these data could result in extremely broad error ranges or bias in estimates. 
Pauly’s (1986) empirical methods have an order-of-magnitude error range and thus were 
considered as a worst-case solution only. 
While bioenergetics data was limited, weight-at-age data existed for many species throughout the 
region: the method of fitting the generalized Von Bertalanffy growth equations to these data 
(Essington et al. 2001) was thus selected. (The solution for Q/B given above, (Z+3K)/A, is a 
solution for a specialized case of the equations, as described below). 
The generalized Von Bertalanffy growth equation assumes that both consumption and respiration 
scale allometrically with body weight, and change in body weight over time (dW/dT) is 
calculated as follows (Paloheimo and Dickie 1965): 
dWt d n= H ⋅Wt − k ⋅Wt	 (1)dt 
Here, Wt is body mass, t is the age of the fish (in years), and H, d, k, and n are allometric 
parameters. The term H ⋅Wt
d is an allometric term for “useable” consumption over a year, in 
other words, the consumption (in wet weight) by the predator after indigestible portions of the 
prey have been removed and assuming constant caloric density between predator and prey. Total 
consumption (Q) is calculated as 
(1/ A) ⋅ H ⋅Wt
d , where A is a scaling fraction between predator 
217
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
and prey wet weights that accounts for indigestible portions of the prey and differences in caloric 
density. The term k ⋅Wt
n is an allometric term for the amount of biomass lost yearly as 
respiration. 
Based on an analysis performed across a range of fish species, Essington et al. (2001) suggested 
that it is reasonable to assume that the respiration exponent n is equal to 1 (respiration linearly 
proportional to body weight). In this case, the differential equation above can be integrated to 
give the following solution for weight-at-age: 
−k (1−d ) ( t−t )0 1−dWt = W∞ ⋅ (1 − e ) 
1 
(2) 
WhereW∞  (asymptotic body mass) is equal to (H k )1− 
1 
d , and t0 is the weight of the organism at 
time=0. If the consumption exponent d is set equal to 2/3, this equation simplifies into the 
“specialized” von Bertalanffy length-at-age equation most used in fisheries management, with 
the “traditional” von Bertalanffy K parameter being equal to the k parameter from the above 
equations divided by 3. 
From measurements of body weight and age, equation 2 can be used to fit four parameters (W∞ , 
d, k, and t0) and the relationship between W∞  and the H, k, and d parameters can then be used to 
determine the consumption rate H ⋅Wt
d  for any given age class of fish. For these calculations, 
weight-at-age data available and specific to the modeled regions were fit by minimizing the 
difference between log(observed) and log(predicted) body weights as calculated by minimizing 
negative log likelihood: observation error was assumed to be in weight but not aging. A process-
error model was also examined but did not give significantly different results.  
Initial fitting of 4-parameter models showed, in many cases, poor convergence to unique minima 
and shallow sum-of-squares surfaces: the fits suffered especially from lack of data at the younger 
age classes that would allow fitting to body weights near t=0 or during juvenile, rapidly growing 
life stages. To counter this, the following multiple models were tested for goodness-of-fit: 
1. All four parameters estimated by minimization; 
2. 
d fixed at 2/3 (specialized von Bertalanffy assumption) 
3. d fixed at 0.8 (median value based on metaanalysis by Essington et al. 2001). 
4. t0 fixed at 0. 
5. d fixed at 2/3 with t0 fixed at 0, and d fixed at 0.8 with t0 fixed at 0. 
The multiple models were evaluated using Akaike’s Information Criterion, AIC (Anderson and 
Burnham 2002). In general, the different methods resulted in a twofold range of consumption 
rate estimates; consistently, model #3, 
d fixed at 0.8 while the other three parameters were free, 
gave the most consistently good results using the AIC. In some cases model #1 was marginally 
better, but in some cases, model #1 failed to converge. The poorest fits were almost always 
obtained by assuming that d was fixed at 2/3.  
To obtain absolute consumption (
Q) for a given age class, the additional parameter A is required 
to account for indigestible and otherwise unassimilated portions of prey. We noted that the range 
of indigestible percentage for a wide range of North Pacific zooplankton and fish summarized in 
218
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
Davis (2003) was between 5-30%, with major zooplankton (copepods and euphasiids), as well as 
many forage fish, having a narrower range of indigestible percentages, generally between 10­
20%. Further, bioenergetics models, for example for walleye pollock (Buckley and Livingston 
1994), indicate that nitrogenous waste (excretion) and egestion resulted in an additional 20-30% 
loss of consumed biomass. As specific bioenergetics models were not available for most species, 
we made a uniform assumption of a total non-respirative loss of 40% (from a range of 25-60%) 
for all fish species, with a corresponding A value of 0.6. 
Finally, consumption for a given age class was scaled to population-level consumption using the 
available numbers-at-age data from stock assessments, or using mortality rates and the 
assumption of an equilibrium age structure in cases where numbers-at-age reconstructions were 
not available. 
7.12 Diet Queries for Fish 
The most central parameter set for food web models are the diet composition matrices, 
obtainable through stomach sampling or other analyses. In particular, the elaboration of our food 
web models with respect to fished species depends heavily on the analysis of 250,000+ stomachs 
collected by the Resource Ecology and Ecosystem Management (REEM) program. Continuation 
of this collection will allow for a regular update and improvement of these models. Due to the 
high resolution and coverage of this diet data, we were able to model functional groups at a 
relatively high resolution: over 120 functional groups are specifically and separately accounted 
with survey strata-level resolution (rough depth and location), with specific juvenile and adult 
accounting for several of the commercial groundfish, crab, and pinniped species. Diets estimated 
directly from stomach samples collected in the same area that a model covers are considered 
“direct”.  
The diet composition for a species is calculated from stomach sampling beginning at the level of 
the individual survey haul (1), combining across hauls within a survey stratum (2), weighting 
stratum diet compositions by stratum biomass (3), and finally combining across predator size 
classes by weighting according to size-specific ration (consumption rate) estimates and biomass 
from stock assessment estimated age structure (4). Consumption rate calculations are described 
in detail above. 
Notation:  
DC = diet composition 
W = weight in stomach 
n = prey 
p = predator 
s = predator size class 
h = survey haul 
r = survey stratum 
B = biomass estimate 
v = survey 
a = assessment 
R = Q/B = ration estimate 
219
 
 
 
 
 
 
     
 
  
 
     
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Diet composition (DC) of prey n in predator p of size s in haul h is the total weight of prey n in 
all of the stomachs of predator p of size s in the haul divided by the sum over all prey in all of the 
stomachs for that predator size class in that haul: 
DC = Wn, p,s,h n , p,s,h ∑Wn, p,s,h (1) 
n 
Diet composition of prey n in predator p of size s in survey stratum r is the average of the diet 
compositions across hauls within that stratum: 
DC = ∑ DC h (2)n, p,s,r n, p,s,h
 
h
 
Diet composition of prey n in predator p of size s for the entire area t is the sum over all strata of 
the diet composition in stratum r weighted by the survey biomass proportion of predator p of size 
s in stratum r: 
vDCn, p,s,t = ∑DCn, p,s,r * Bp,s,r ∑ Bp
v 
,s,r (3) 
rr 
Diet composition of prey n in predator p for the entire area t is the sum over all predator sizes of 
the diet composition for predator p of size s as weighted by the relative stock assessment biomass 
of predator size s times the ration of predator p of size s: 
∑ Ba * R (4)DCn, p,t = ∑DCn, p,s,t * Bp
a 
,s * Rp,s p,s p ,s 
ss 
Diets for fish and shellfish not included in the REEM database were taken from published 
literature sources or the nearest survey samples. For example, diets estimated from stomachs 
collected in the EBS may be used as surrogates in the AI and GOA if these last systems lack 
specific diet information. However these diets would be considered “general” for the AI and 
GOA in the sense that they are not from stomach samples taken as part of the REEM program 
and are neither weighted by depth nor location (but they would be for the EBS); in these cases 
prey items were assigned fixed percentages.  
7.13 Adult Juvenile Parameters 
Adult juvenile “split pool” parameters for the EBS, AI, and GOA (Table B9) are only used 
during Sense routine execution, and were not perturbed for that routine. Split pool parameters 
MinTimeJuv, MaxTimeJuv, RecPower, Prep0, and WtGrow were set to respective default values 
1.0, 1.0001, 1, 0.3, and 0.8 for all groups. See Christensen et al. 2000 for a description of these 
parameters.  
220
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
Table B9. Juvenile adult split pool parameters used in Sense routines. 
Split Pool EBS EBS EBS 
Time Juv WavgWk vonB K 
AI AI AI 
Time Juv WavgWk vonB K 
GOA GOA GOA 
Time Juv WavgWk vonB K 
N .  F u r  S e a l 3 1 0 0 . 2 3 1 0 0 . 2 3 1 0 0 . 2 
Steller Sea Lion 3 10 0.2 3 10 0.2 3 10 0.2 
W. Pollock 2 2.95 0.23 2 2.95 0.23 2 1.95 0.23 
P. Cod 2 4.45 0.23 2 4.45 0.23 2 4.45 0.23 
Herring 2 2.36 0.3 2 2.36 0.3 2 2.36 0.3 
Arrowtooth 2 5 0.17 2 5 0.17 2 5 0.17 
Kamchatka fl. 2 5 0.17 2 5 0.17 
Gr. Turbot 2 10 0.17 2 10 0.17 
P. Halibut 2 10 0.17 2 10 0.17 2 10 0.17 
YF. Sole 6 2 0.15 6 2 0.15 
FH. Sole 4 2 0.18 4 2 0.18 4 2 0.18 
N. Rock sole 4 2 0.18 
Sablefish 3 3.24 0.13 3 3.24 0.13 3 3.24 0.13 
POP 2 1 0 0 . 2 1 
Shortspine Thorns 3 3.97 0.02 
Atka mackerel 2 2 0.2 2 2 0.44 2 2 0.44 
Bairdi 2 2 0.2 
King Crab 2 2 0.2 
Opilio 2 2 0.2 
7.14 Fisheries 
7.14.1 Halibut hook and line fishery 
Information on landings and discards of Pacific halibut in the directed fisheries is available 
from the International Pacific Halibut Commission (IPHC) 
http://www.iphc.washington.edu/halcom/research/sa/sa.data/sa.data.html#removals. All data 
were converted from units of pounds dressed weight to t round weight by assuming dressed 
weight is 75% of round weight and then converting to metric units. We summed total directed 
landings in commercial and sport fisheries and averaged over multiple years in the early 1990’s 
(specific to each model, see below) to obtain average annual landings of Pacific halibut, and did 
the same with the “wastage” category to get discards of Pacific halibut. For the EBS, halibut 
information was taken from IPHC area 4 for 1991. For the AI, halibut information was taken 
from IPHC area 4B, and the years 1992-1994 were averaged. For the GOA, halibut information 
was taken from IPHC areas 3A and 3B, and averaged over 1990-1993. 
There is no official data on bycatch of other species in directed fisheries for Pacific halibut. In 
the GOA, we estimated bycatch using data from a combination of recent and past longline 
surveys conducted by IPHC. Recent survey data are available at 
http://www.iphc.washington.edu/halcom/survey/ssadata/ssadata.htm, and include bycatch of 
sablefish, Pacific cod, and rockfish. Additional information on shark bycatch in the survey were 
obtained from Ken Goldman (who obtained them from IPHC and summarized them in the 
Ecosystem Considerations chapter in 2000). Additional information from IPHC Scientific Report 
77 (Table 4) was used to estimate bycatch of skates, arrowtooth flounder, and sea stars, and to 
supplement data on Pacific cod and sablefish bycatch. These surveys were conducted in the Gulf 
of Alaska during 1983 and 1987. Survey bycatch of these species was reported in numbers; we 
221
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
converted to weights using the average weights of these animals from the North Pacific 
groundfish observer database and or from the Auke Bay sablefish longline survey, reasoning that 
the IPHC survey and groundfish fisheries targeted roughly the same size distribution of fishes 
(adults). Bycatch by species was then scaled to legal halibut catch from the surveys and this 
bycatch rate was applied to the directed halibut catches described above to estimate bycatch in 
the fishery. EBS halibut fishery bycatch was estimated by assuming similar catch rates as 
calculated by the above method for the GOA, and scaling them to EBS directed halibut catch. 
Halibut fishery bycatch was not estimated for the AI model but note total removals (fishing and 
discards) amount to 3,000 t in this system, compared to ~10,000 and 30,000 t in the GOA and 
EBS, respectively. 
While many assumptions are involved in estimating bycatch for the GOA and EBS halibut 
fisheries, we felt it was more important to have estimates of bycatch from reasonable sources in 
these areas than to construct an unrealistic model where hook and line fisheries directed at 
halibut took no bycatch at all. We look forward to improvements in monitoring of the directed 
Pacific halibut fishery so that bycatch may be estimated more accurately.  
7.14.2 Crab fleet, herring fleet, salmon fleet, and shrimp trawl fisheries 
The only data available for these fisheries at this time is directed landings of target species, 
which were obtained from the Alaska Department of Fish and Game (see 
http://www.cf.adfg.state.ak.us/cf_home.htm ). In contrast to our treatment of the Pacific halibut 
fishery, we are assuming that bycatch in these fisheries represents a very minor component of 
catch due to the rather specific gears (pots, seines, gill nets, and small mesh trawls) employed in 
each fishery. However, more information on bycatch in these fisheries would be highly desirable 
for future modeling efforts.  
In the EBS, catches of king, Tanner, and snow crabs for 1991 are combined within a single 
crab pot fleet, and herring and shrimp total catches from 1991 are attributed to their respective 
fleets. In the GOA, the crab fleets are separated into king crab and Tanner crab fisheries, with 
ADF&G reported landings averaged over 1990-1993 for each fleet (the landings for king crab 
are trace landings only which were taken in 1990 in Kodiak; the fishery has been closed in the 
GOA since the early 1980’s). Similarly, GOA herring, salmon, and shrimp trawl catches are the 
average of 1990-1993 ADF&G reported landings. In the AI model, king crab catches from 1991­
1994 were averaged. Catch used was the Adak king crab catch which includes red king 
Paralithodes camtschaticus and golden (brown) king Lithodes aequispinus. Likewise, salmon 
seine and gill net catch for the AI came from half the catch for 1994 for the Aleutian peninsula 
and Pribilof Islands regional catch, because more specific information could not be found. 
7.14.3 Subsistence fishery 
The Alaska Department of Fish and Game maintains an extensive database on subsistence 
fishing, which is available to the public at 
http://www.state.ak.us/local/akpages/FISH.GAME/subsist/geninfo/publctns/cpdb.htm. This 
database contains community and year specific estimates of subsistence harvest for marine 
mammals, salmon, fish other than salmon, and marine invertebrates. The catches are reported by 
222
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
   
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
community, so first we assigned each community in the database to a model area, either EBS, 
AI, or GOA, using the community descriptions listed in the database. Because not all 
communities were sampled in all years, but some were sampled in multiple years, we elected to 
average years for better sampled communities and then sum across all communities regardless of 
year to get an annual estimate of subsistence removals for each area. This method assumes that 
average annual subsistence catch has been relatively constant between 1982 and 1998, and that 
all relevant communities were sampled at least once in the database. In the EBS model, only 
marine mammal indigenous catches were included in the “Indigenous” fishery. The EBS 
“Subsistence” fishery includes harvest of salmon. In the GOA model, both indigenous marine 
mammal catches and subsistence harvests of fish and invertebrates by all user groups are 
included in a single combined fishery called the “Subsistence” fishery. In the AI, the single 
“Indigenous” fishery includes catch of marine mammals and salmon.  
7.14.4 Groundfish fisheries 
“Groundfish” are defined by the North Pacific Fishery Management Council (NPFMC) as 
demersal fish species including walleye pollock, Pacific cod, Atka mackerel, sablefish, rockfish 
(
Sebastes sp.), and flatfish species not including Pacific halibut. Federally contracted fishery 
observers are placed on a large portion of vessels participating in groundfish fisheries to sample 
catches, and the state of Alaska maintains a database of landings from each vessel and port. 
Therefore, considerable data are available to characterize groundfish fisheries in terms of area 
fished, gear used, vessel type, and bycatch. In each model, we designed groundfish fisheries to 
be gear and species specific so that the bycatch associated with each fleet was relatively distinct, 
and so that simulated fleet manipulations would give realistic results. We first describe the 
groundfish fisheries included in each model, and second describe the methods used to estimate 
the catch associated with each fishery. 
In the EBS model there are 15 groundfish fleets. The Pollock Trawl fleet represents the 
directed pollock fishery which uses pelagic trawl gear. There are three fisheries directed at 
Pacific cod: Cod Trawl uses bottom trawls, Cod Longline uses hook and line gear, and Cod Pots 
uses trap gear, all with the intent to catch Pacific cod, but each with a very different suite of 
bycatch species. Six fisheries use bottom trawls to catch different flatfish species: Rock sole 
Trawl, Yellowfin sole Trawl, Arrowtooth Trawl, Flathead sole Trawl, Other flatfish Trawl 
(primarily Alaska plaice), and Turbot Trawl. These fisheries operate in different habitats and at 
different times of the year, and so have distinct bycatch species even if they happen to be 
prosecuted on the same vessels. The Other Groundfish Trawl fleet represents the occasional 
catch of Atka mackerel by bottom trawls in the EBS. The catch of rockfish in bottom trawls in 
represented by the Rockfish Trawl fleet. This fleet has different catch composition than the 
Rockfish Longline fleet which targets generally larger, deeper dwelling rockfish. Other hook and 
line gear fisheries include the Sablefish Longline and Turbot Longline which target the deep-
dwelling groundfish species.  
In the GOA model there are 8 groundfish fleets. The Pollock Trawl, Cod Longline, Cod Trawl, 
Cod Pot, Rockfish Trawl, and Other groundfish Trawl fleets are all defined the same as in the 
EBS model. The GOA had an active Atka mackerel trawl fishery (represented by the Other 
groundfish Trawl fleet) during the early 1990’s which does not exist at present, but is modeled 
here. Flatfish fisheries do not feature as prominently in the GOA as in the EBS, and do not have 
223
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
the same distinctive nature to define separate fleets, so a single Flatfish Trawl fishery was 
defined in the GOA. The Sablefish Longline fleet in the GOA also includes catch assigned to the 
Rockfish Longline fleet in the EBS, because in the GOA these are believed to be a single fleet 
fishing over a more heterogeneous habitat.  
In the AI model there are 11 groundfish fleets. These fleets are structured identically to the 
EBS fleets, with the exception that the AI has a single Flatfish Trawl fleet similar to the GOA 
model. In the AI, the Other groundfish Trawl fleet is more properly termed the Atka Mackerel 
Trawl fleet, since this is the center of the Atka mackerel fishery. 
The estimation of catch within each of the groundfish fleets was a two step process, because 
the two components of the catch; target species and nontarget (bycatch) species within each fleet 
come from different datasets. 
Target species are defined as the formally managed groundfish in 
Alaska, including pollock, Pacific cod, all flatfish groups, all rockfish groups, sablefish, and 
Atka mackerel. These species are referred to as “target species” throughout this section of the 
document. 
Non-target species are defined as the non-commercial species either managed as 
complexes or not managed at all under the NPFMC Groundfish Fishery Management Plan or any 
other management plan. Species in this second group include sharks, skates, sculpins, grenadiers, 
greenlings, other shelf and slope demersal fishes, forage fish species (aside from herring and 
salmon), cephalopods, and benthic invertebrates (aside from the tanner, snow, and king crabs). 
These unmanaged non-commercial groups are referred to as “nontarget species” throughout this 
section of the document. 
Catch of target species was estimated exclusively from the NMFS Alaska Regional Office 
“Blend” database. The “Blend” database represents the official total catch of target groundfish 
species for federal waters in Alaska, covering the years 1991-2002. The NMFS Alaska Regional 
Office tracks the catch of all major groundfish species inseason as part of the quota management 
system. Reports on target species catch come in weekly from both at-sea fishery observers and 
groundfish processors; the data in these reports are combined (“blended”) into what is called the 
Blend database. The Blend contains the estimated catch of all target species by target fishery, 
gear, and area. (Target fisheries are defined within the Blend based on species composition of the 
catch.) In addition, the total catch of each target species is divided into the retained portion (that 
kept after caught) and the discarded portion (thrown overboard); this division is based on 
estimates made at sea by fishery observers. This official total catch database also contains 
estimates of halibut, salmon, herring, and crab (tanner, snow, and king) discards in groundfish 
fisheries (also estimated by fishery observers). In the groundfish fishery context, these species 
are “prohibited species” because groundfish fisheries may not retain them and they are the 
targets of separate fisheries (described above). We used the annual Blend summaries of retained 
and discarded catch of target species (pollock, cod, Atka mackerel, sablefish, rockfish, and 
flatfish) and prohibited species (halibut, herring, salmon, king, tanner, and snow crabs), by target 
fishery, area, and gear from the early 1990s in the first step of defining groundfish fleets in the 
mass balance models of the EBS, GOA, and AI.  
Catch of non-target species is recorded by fishery observers in the field, but has not 
historically been incorporated into the NMFS Alaska Regional Office Blend database; only the 
target and prohibited species catch composition recorded by observers was incorporated into the 
Blend catch database. Therefore, non target species catch in the groundfish fleets (both the 
retained and discarded portions) was estimated from the full catch composition data in the 
Observer database (housed at the NMFS Alaska Fisheries Science Center). The disadvantage of 
224
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
the Observer database is that it encompasses only the portion of the groundfish fleets that carry 
observers, so this observed catch information must be extrapolated to the entire groundfish fleet 
to be comparable to the official total catch of target species (which was the result of “blending” 
catch from observer reports and landings from groundfish processors without observers). With 
the existing information for 1991-2002, the best method for extrapolating to estimate total non 
target catch in groundfish fleets is to stratify the full Observer database for a given year and the 
Blend database for the same year in the same way, and use the official total catch estimates of 
target species (pollock, cod, etc) from the Blend database as a basis for extrapolating non target 
species catch. The method is detailed below. 
Within the Observer database containing the full catch composition, we simulated the steps 
followed in the Blend database to achieve equivalent strata between the Observer database and 
the Blend database. The Observer catch data was first grouped into units by individual vessel, 
gear, management area, and week, within each year, and the catch of each species was summed 
over a unit. Then, “target fisheries” were assigned to each vessel / gear / management area / 
week unit based upon the composition of target species retained catch, according to the same 
algorithm used by the Regional office. For example, a vessel with catch that was more than 95% 
pollock for a week in a given management area would be assigned to a “pollock target fishery,” 
and in this manner vessels using the same gear in the same area with similar weekly catch 
compositions are assigned to the same strata for catch accounting purposes. Then the catch of 
each species is summed over vessels and weeks within the same target, gear type, and 
management area. In the Blend database, only the catches of target species are included, but in 
our strata estimated from the Observer database, both target and of non target species were 
summed for each year by target fishery, gear type, and management area. Then, the catch rates of 
suites of nontarget species per unit target species were calculated within the Observer database 
for each target fishery, gear type, and management area. These nontarget species catch rates per 
ton of target species in the Observer database were then scaled up to the official Blend catch of 
target species for the same fishery/gear/area strata. For example, we calculated the t of squid and 
capelin observed per ton of observed pollock in the pollock trawl fishery in the western GOA. 
Then we scaled this estimate of squid and capelin per ton of pollock in this stratum from the 
Observer database up to the official total pollock catch within the same stratum from the Blend 
database. Finally, we summed catches across management areas to arrive at total nontarget 
species catches for the AI, GOA, and EBS within each target fishery. Because not all nontarget 
species are discarded, we estimated the percent retained of each nontarget species group in a 
similar manner (observed retained nontarget catch divided by observed target catch times total 
target catch equals retained nontarget catch). Discarded nontarget species catch was estimated by 
subtracting retained nontarget species catch from total nontarget species catch for each fishery 
gear combination.  
The Observer database contains the appropriate information to simulate Blend database target 
fishery assignment and stratification for the years 1997 to present. Therefore, our nontarget 
species catch estimates are most appropriate only for the late 1990’s groundfish fisheries. To 
scale these nontarget catch estimates to the appropriate early 1990’s timeframe for the AI, GOA, 
and EBS models, the 1997-2000 average nontarget catch in t by fishery was converted to a catch 
rate per ton of target species. These catch rates were then applied to target species tonnages for 
the appropriate time period to estimate nontarget catch in t for that time period. This method 
assumes that average catch rates of nontarget species have remained constant between the early 
and late 1990s. 
225
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 The accuracy of catch estimates for non target species groups depends on the level of observer 
coverage in a given fishery. Observer coverage requirements in Alaska are based upon vessel 
size. In general, larger vessels fish in the Bering Sea, such that observer coverage levels in some 
fisheries approach 100%. Our calculations for 1997-2001 suggest that the BSAI region has 
approximately 70-80% observer coverage overall. The size distribution of vessels fishing in the 
Gulf of Alaska results in approximately 20-25% observer coverage overall, although some target 
fisheries (i.e., rockfish) are prosecuted on larger vessels with 100% observer coverage. 
Therefore, in making these catch estimates, we are assuming that other species catch aboard 
observed vessels is representative of other species catch aboard unobserved vessels throughout 
Alaska. Because observer assignment to vessels in the 30% coverage class is not at random, 
there is a possibility that this assumption is incorrect. 
Additional calculations were required to estimate the amount of fishery offal entering the 
system from groundfish fisheries. We used product recovery rates published in Economic SAFEs 
from the early 1990s to determine what portion of retained round weight target species catch was 
turned into product, and assumed a fixed percentage of the remainder was returned to the system 
as fishery offal. 
7.14.5 Discard and fishery comparisons between models 
Discards of whole fish and offal (processed fish parts) are the byproducts of fishery removals 
within each system, and are estimated from official catch data. Discards are mostly eaten by 
crabs. Discards might be eaten by fish too, but we have no way to distinguish consumed 
discarded whole fish from consumed free swimming whole fish in the food habits data. Because 
there are more crabs in the EBS, more discards are consumed within that system. Most discards 
come from the flatfish trawl fishery in the EBS and GOA, and the Atka mackerel trawl fishery in 
the AI. Sablefish hook and line is a secondary source of discard (mostly of grenadiers) in the 
GOA, as well as the pollock trawl fishery. EBS runners-up include the cod and pollock trawl 
fisheries, and the rockfish and cod trawl fisheries in the AI. Fishery offal estimates might be high 
because we have taken everything that was not recovered as product returned it to the ocean, 
which may not happen in all the systems. However, the EEs for offal are quite high (especially in 
the GOA where cod and sablefish diets had to be changed to get offal to balance) so apparently 
the demand is pretty high for offal according to food habits data. In the GOA offal is consumed 
about equally at 33% each by sablefish and cod (and that is after the reductions for balance) and 
then by halibut, pollock, bairdi and arrowtooth flounder. In the EBS, cod and pollock account for 
about a third of consumption each, followed by Alaska skates, flathead sole and arrowtooth 
flounder. In the AI, Pacific cod eat 45% of offal, followed by pollock at 30%, and then northern 
rockfish and Atka mackerel. The EE of offal is .65 in the AI, .8 in the EBS, and .92 in the GOA. 
The offal-balancing assumption in the EBS was that some (2% of) things identified as offal in 
stomachs were actually naturally scarred fish which looked remarkably similar to a fish that had 
been processed.  
There are different levels of detritus consumption estimated within each system. For example, 
there was an excess of pelagic detritus created in the GOA, where we estimated less 
microzooplankton and more phytoplankton relative to the EBS and AI, so the pelagic detritus EE 
is 0.21 in the GOA. In the other systems the detritus created is pretty much used within the 
system. Benthic detritus is most tightly wired in the EBS and was engineered to have the same 
EE as pelagic detritus by sending different proportions of dead stuff into each pool. The benthic 
226

 
 
 
  
  
  
 
    
 
  
 
  
   
   
 
 
detritus EE is 0.6 in the AI, 0.9 in the EBS and 0.5 in the GOA. The large EBS biomass of 
bivalves feeds on benthic detritus, creating a high demand, which was supplied via the 
disproportionate assignment of detritus to the benthic loop in the EBS relative to the AI and 
GOA. 
Fisheries were created from the official catch and bycatch data reported in each system, and 
supplemented with other information as available. The flatfish trawl fishery is a different fishery 
in each system. It catches primarily arrowtooth flounder in the GOA (not really the target but 
dominant bycatch everywhere regardless of target), mostly yellowfin sole and rock sole in the 
EBS. In the AI it is primarily an arrowtooth and turbot fishery. The pollock trawl fisheries 
overwhelmingly catch pollock in all three systems. The other groundfish trawl fishery is actually 
the Atka mackerel fishery. Sablefish fisheries catch more grenadiers than sablefish, in the GOA 
and EBS. In the AI, sablefish fisheries catch mostly sablefish, turbot, arrowtooth flounder and 
thornyheads, and grenadiers don’t even show up. Turbot hook and line has a big grenadier catch 
in the EBS and none in the AI. Turbot trawl doesn’t catch grenadiers in the EBS either. The 
halibut fishery in the AI is totally clean because no bycatch has been entered, while bycatch as 
been estimated based on halibut survey data in other areas. Crab fisheries have no bycatch (or 
catch) in the GOA, because they were entered for historical fitting purposes. Crab fisheries have 
some bycatch in the EBS, and a small catch of mammals in the AI. The shrimp trawl fishery in 
GOA is also a placeholder. The salmon fleets catch only salmon, which is probably not such a 
bad assumption. Herring fleets are likewise bycatch free, due to lack of observer data. The 
indigenous fleet is mammal oriented in the EBS, but includes all fish as well and inverts in the 
GOA, and is therefore not comparable across systems.  
227
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
8. Appendix C: Model Inputs and Results: Values of B, EE, PB, QB, 
TL, Catch and Discards of Target and Non-target Species, and 
Diets in Each System. 
Table C1. Biomass (B, t/ km2) and ecotrophic efficiency (EE) for the Aleutian Islands (AI), Eastern Bering 
Sea (EBS) and Gulf of Alaska (GOA). #N/A indicates groups not included in a model. 
Group AI B AI EE EBS B EBS EE GOA B GOA EE 
Transient Killers 0.00039 0.00000 0.00014 0.00000 0.00014 0.00000 
Sperm and beaked whale 0.14647 0.00000 0.01767 0.00000 0.04509 0.00000 
Resident Killers 0.00391 0.00000 0.00135 0.17018 0.00136 0.02055 
Porpoises 0.06577 0.23353 0.00362 0.05453 0.01507 0.05450 
Belugas #N/A #N/A 0.01225 0.04051 #N/A #N/A 
Gray Whales #N/A #N/A 0.03267 0.03919 0.05543 0.04275 
Humpbacks 0.14313 0.30963 0.01210 0.10246 0.17838 0.07181 
Fin Whales 0.04394 0.00000 0.45474 0.09309 0.26610 0.10880 
Sei whales 0.00633 0.00000 0.00633 0.06206 0.00633 0.06766 
Right whales 0.00356 0.00000 0.00355 0.07576 0.00355 0.08259 
Minke whales 0.09756 0.22826 0.02404 0.05066 0.00236 0.05294 
Bowhead Whales #N/A #N/A 0.00717 0.24707 #N/A #N/A 
Sea Otters 0.00687 0.10079 0.00075 0.02159 0.00345 0.02326 
Walrus Bd Seals #N/A #N/A 0.11425 0.00628 #N/A #N/A 
N. Fur Seal #N/A #N/A 0.03263 0.03962 0.00904 0.02983 
N. Fur Seal_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.00191 0.02144 0.00005 0.02338 
Central S.S.L. #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.01085 0.04715 
Central S.S.L._Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.00103 0.00989 
West S.S.L. 0.05206 0.12703 0.00147 0.35899 0.00508 0.04569 
West S.S.L_Juv 0.00545 0.02363 0.00015 0.00503 0.00066 0.00988 
Resident seals 0.00362 0.24674 0.01345 0.04362 0.00329 0.22533 
Wintering seals #N/A #N/A 0.03029 0.87048 #N/A #N/A 
Shearwater 0.00181 0.24346 0.00040 0.08498 0.00023 0.27538 
Murres 0.00134 0.15135 0.00814 0.05014 0.00483 0.16248 
Kittiwakes 0.00048 0.33839 0.00066 0.11054 0.00089 0.35819 
Auklets 0.00807 0.15135 0.00175 0.05014 0.00030 0.16248 
Puffins 0.00411 0.64129 0.00047 0.21246 0.00648 0.68845 
Fulmars 0.00488 0.46639 0.00052 0.15451 0.00082 0.50069 
Storm Petrels 0.00353 0.21376 0.00000 0.07082 0.00023 0.22948 
Cormorants 0.00107 0.16161 0.00015 0.05354 0.00035 0.17349 
Gulls 0.00058 0.15473 0.00010 0.05126 0.00057 0.16611 
Albatross Jaeger 0.00008 0.37965 0.00010 0.12578 0.00023 0.40757 
Sleeper shark 0.01591 0.90384 0.05325 0.16086 0.01765 0.84261 
Salmon shark 0.00173 0.87967 #N/A #N/A 0.03459 0.13512 
Dogfish 0.00122 0.96311 #N/A #N/A 0.09011 0.89714 
W. Pollock 5.69288 0.83498 18.48621 0.84405 5.55270 0.98173 
W. Pollock_Juv 2.89452 0.80000 2.78384 0.80000 0.67179 0.81664 
P. Cod 2.93247 0.49340 2.46497 0.51353 1.39008 0.53591 
P. Cod_Juv 0.01590 0.80000 0.30615 0.80000 0.13032 0.80272 
Herring 0.01766 0.80000 0.61156 0.57579 0.28063 0.96844 
Herring_Juv 0.00419 0.80000 0.07596 0.80000 0.59760 0.77995 
Arrowtooth 0.53109 0.37749 0.94434 0.85088 5.76647 0.24254 
Arrowtooth_Juv 0.00086 0.80000 0.09443 0.02711 0.54653 0.12502 
Kamchatka fl. 0.50776 0.00424 0.05607 0.18138 #N/A #N/A 
Kamchatka fl._Juv 0.00229 0.80000 0.00561 0.00099 #N/A #N/A 
Gr. Turbot 0.28438 0.93625 0.34930 0.54905 #N/A #N/A 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 0.00016 0.00076 0.03493 0.18415 #N/A #N/A 
P. Halibut 0.70447 0.41832 0.22190 0.68985 1.51977 0.40976 
P. Halibut_Juv 0.01407 0.80000 0.02219 0.44453 0.18245 0.36829 
229
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C1.  Continued.  
Group AI B AI EE EBS B EBS EE GOA B GOA EE 
YF. Sole 0.00025 0.80000 4.83331 0.37020 0.23789 0.17200 
YF. Sole_Juv 0.00016 0.01399 0.48333 0.28598 #N/A #N/A 
FH. Sole 0.07799 0.37297 1.19385 0.20427 0.73941 0.34620 
FH. Sole_Juv 0.00016 0.00904 0.11938 0.41868 0.05780 0.80000 
N. Rock sole 0.64577 0.06063 3.22571 0.42726 0.20969 0.27131 
N. Rock sole_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.32257 0.12131 #N/A #N/A 
S. Rock sole 0.00560 0.03616 #N/A #N/A 0.35209 0.20336 
AK Plaice 0.00000 0.80000 1.06840 0.53714 0.01467 0.14337 
Dover Sole 0.00338 0.07811 0.00023 0.40147 0.31847 0.80992 
Rex Sole 0.11197 0.80000 0.04063 0.48703 0.31825 0.66750 
Misc. Flatfish 0.00455 0.80000 0.22369 0.80000 0.19583 0.53350 
Alaska skate 0.14754 0.54002 0.68045 0.19204 0.00235 0.44411 
Bering skate 0.00000 0.06130 0.03911 0.31007 0.02908 0.59166 
Aleutian skate 0.07257 0.66751 0.03813 0.21719 0.00390 0.85155 
Whiteblotched skate 0.10280 0.70715 0.00798 0.11017 0.00047 0.62816 
Mud skate 0.01375 0.63799 0.00187 0.11476 0.00000 0.21266 
Longnosed skate 0.00000 0.06130 0.00050 0.01373 0.04974 0.78242 
Big skate 0.00000 0.06130 0.00200 0.01370 0.10626 0.50942 
Black skate 0.00000 0.06130 0.00334 0.01626 0.00000 0.21266 
Sablefish 0.14798 0.92352 0.03145 0.51973 0.93149 0.85602 
Sablefish_Juv 0.01076 0.80000 0.00666 0.63432 0.00597 0.80000 
Eelpouts 0.79884 0.80000 2.37039 0.80000 1.06943 0.80000 
Giant Grenadier 5.07601 0.17141 0.86149 0.29868 0.90764 0.32050 
Pacific Grenadier 0.00000 0.04814 0.00497 0.01826 0.00103 0.16856 
Other Macruids 0.02556 0.80000 0.10163 0.01879 0.00913 0.30919 
Misc. fish deep 1.94585 0.80000 0.00809 0.80000 0.02137 0.80000 
POP 6.27887 0.31071 0.16664 0.84803 0.84069 0.47480 
POP_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.00593 0.00720 
Sharpchin Rock 0.05668 0.80000 0.00154 0.80000 0.35545 0.80000 
Northern Rock 2.69692 0.47863 0.02807 0.80000 0.36245 0.65053 
Dusky Rock 0.00597 0.99770 0.00061 0.52334 0.13955 0.89610 
Shortraker Rock 0.42159 0.47473 0.00949 0.45495 0.07740 0.61132 
Rougheye Rock 0.21945 0.99751 0.00369 0.61836 0.16437 0.39262 
Shortspine Thorns 0.10894 0.31897 0.00461 0.32750 0.06315 0.81817 
Shortspine Thorns_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.00061 0.80000 
Other Sebastes 0.08012 0.80000 0.01119 0.80000 0.08924 0.80000 
Atka mackerel 11.64525 0.96130 0.10685 0.73767 0.45449 0.69802 
Atka mackerel_Juv 0.52671 0.80000 0.00011 0.00227 0.06491 0.80000 
Greenlings 0.01584 0.80000 0.00119 0.80000 0.01111 0.05330 
Lg. Sculpins 0.11433 0.80000 0.54032 0.10351 0.08889 0.67633 
Other sculpins 6.27145 0.80000 1.16057 0.80000 0.81687 0.80000 
Misc. fish shallow 1.12650 0.80000 1.17887 0.80000 0.83899 0.80000 
Octopi 0.38321 0.80000 0.19900 0.80000 0.78347 0.80000 
Squids 7.38554 0.80000 0.92788 0.80000 1.26545 0.80000 
Salmon returning 0.14020 0.58367 0.16377 0.97420 0.85663 0.49750 
Salmon outgoing 0.01402 0.57232 0.01453 0.80000 0.01713 0.12440 
Bathylagidae 0.44548 0.80000 0.16164 0.80000 0.07371 0.80000 
Myctophidae 25.87673 0.80000 0.79695 0.80000 0.63483 0.80000 
Capelin 3.57765 0.80000 1.23928 0.80000 7.02478 0.80000 
Sandlance 3.74999 0.80000 2.48365 0.80000 2.44271 0.80000 
Eulachon 3.47070 0.80000 0.55245 0.80000 1.15007 0.80000 
Oth. managed forage 3.81374 0.80000 1.05387 0.80000 1.42353 0.80000 
Oth. pelagic smelt 3.46276 0.80000 0.49905 0.80000 0.64213 0.80000 
230
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C1. Continued.  
Group AI B AI EE EBS B EBS EE GOA B GOA EE 
Bairdi 0.40518 0.80000 0.41304 0.61130 0.62836 0.80000 
Bairdi_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.28421 0.80000 #N/A #N/A 
King Crab 0.13508 0.86390 0.21821 0.57129 0.00615 0.90615 
King Crab_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.01739 0.80000 #N/A #N/A 
Opilio #N/A #N/A 1.86670 0.36827 #N/A #N/A 
Opilio_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.63766 0.80000 #N/A #N/A 
Pandalidae 8.28618 0.80000 6.72695 0.80000 10.68705 0.80000 
NP shrimp 15.62519 0.80000 12.82204 0.80000 11.54150 0.80000 
Sea stars 0.10668 0.80000 2.47136 0.00797 0.09552 0.49185 
Brittle stars 0.83244 0.80000 3.08653 0.80000 4.54402 0.20139 
Urchins dollars cucumber 0.98783 0.80000 1.11966 0.80000 1.63093 0.35036 
Snails 1.13344 0.80000 0.82220 0.80000 0.86388 0.80000 
Hermit crabs 0.58692 0.80000 1.78518 0.80000 2.84596 0.80000 
Misc. crabs 1.38528 0.80000 0.72725 0.80000 1.73786 0.80000 
Misc. Crustacean 2.08385 0.80000 8.84222 0.80000 2.12029 0.80000 
Benthic Amphipods 7.43807 0.80000 12.63702 0.80000 5.86887 0.80000 
Anemones 0.01205 0.00330 0.10952 0.11854 0.08887 0.00191 
Corals 0.08800 0.26798 0.01317 0.03633 0.00519 0.10343 
Hydroids 0.03715 0.80000 0.25977 0.80000 0.10507 0.80000 
Urochordata 0.24480 0.07507 0.35450 0.03991 0.24480 0.00936 
Sea Pens 0.00050 0.13232 0.01342 0.00838 0.00055 0.20133 
Sponges 1.12400 0.00664 0.05449 0.64875 0.10750 0.00269 
Bivalves 11.09283 0.80000 61.87307 0.35124 13.85198 0.80000 
Polychaetes 4.40755 0.80000 21.68738 0.21866 3.92329 0.80000 
Misc. worms 2.40662 0.80000 3.71459 0.80000 3.66779 0.80000 
Scyphozoid Jellies 0.11000 0.61467 0.33793 0.66095 0.11000 0.48363 
Fish Larvae 0.70711 0.80000 0.01167 0.80000 0.00378 0.80000 
Chaetognaths 1.62318 0.80000 0.45684 0.80000 0.58533 0.80000 
Euphausiids 49.21892 0.80000 15.83468 0.80000 20.16194 0.80000 
Mysids 2.25670 0.80000 0.97569 0.80000 0.35794 0.80000 
Pelagic Amphipods 6.45118 0.80000 1.54124 0.80000 1.35053 0.80000 
Gelatinous filter feeders 3.15682 0.80000 0.70292 0.80000 0.93923 0.80000 
Pteropods 0.51029 0.80000 0.18736 0.80000 0.59976 0.80000 
Copepods 66.83617 0.80000 22.45891 0.80000 21.86350 0.80000 
Pelagic microbes 36.60860 0.80000 45.00000 0.21665 12.25505 0.80000 
Benthic microbes 8.03611 0.80000 21.94180 0.80000 7.25230 0.80000 
Macroalgae 0.87648 0.80000 0.74829 0.80000 0.87725 0.80000 
Lg Phytoplankton 6.98002 0.80000 3.70393 0.80000 7.86063 0.25317 
Sm Phytoplankton 35.61068 0.80000 39.10807 0.80000 27.65792 0.34525 
Outside Production 3.00016 0.00000 4.00000 0.00000 4.00000 0.00000 
Discards 0.00000 0.02926 0.00000 0.09504 0.00000 0.05910 
Offal 0.00000 0.65212 0.00000 0.55098 0.00000 0.60840 
Pelagic Detritus 0.00000 0.77196 0.00000 0.87545 0.00000 0.19280 
Benthic Detritus 0.00000 0.63128 0.00000 0.91806 0.00000 0.51643 
Outside Detritus 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 0.00000 
231
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Table C2. Input parameters production rate P/B, consumption rate Q/B, and resulting trophic level TL for 
the Aleutian Islands (AI), Eastern Bering Sea (EBS) and Gulf of Alaska (GOA).  
Group AI P/B AI Q/B AI TL EBS P/B EBS Q/B EBS TL GOA P/B GOA Q/B GOA TL 
Transient Killers 0.025 11.157 5.2 0.025 11.157 4.8 0.025 11.157 4.9 
Sperm and beaked whales 0.047 6.609 4.7 0.047 6.609 4.7 0.047 6.609 4.7 
Resident Killers 0.025 11.157 4.7 0.025 11.157 4.7 0.025 11.157 4.8 
Porpoises 0.050 30.000 4.7 0.050 30.000 4.6 0.050 30.000 4.6 
Belugas #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.112 30.000 4.6 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Gray Whales #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.063 8.873 3.5 0.063 8.873 3.5 
Humpbacks 0.038 7.577 3.9 0.038 7.577 3.9 0.038 7.577 3.9 
Fin Whales 0.027 6.517 3.7 0.027 6.517 3.7 0.027 6.517 3.7 
Sei whales 0.040 8.788 3.7 0.040 8.788 3.7 0.040 8.788 3.7 
Right whales 0.033 8.000 3.5 0.033 8.000 3.5 0.033 8.000 3.5 
Minke whales 0.051 7.782 4.1 0.051 7.782 4.1 0.051 7.782 4.1 
Bowhead Whales #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.010 8.680 3.5 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Sea Otters 0.117 73.000 3.5 0.117 73.000 3.7 0.117 73.000 3.8 
Walrus Bd Seals #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.051 15.371 3.6 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
N. Fur Seal #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.091 39.030 4.6 0.091 39.030 4.6 
N. Fur Seal_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.116 49.534 4.6 0.116 49.534 4.6 
Central S.S.L. #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.110 24.074 4.8 
Central S.S.L._Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.494 108.321 4.8 
West S.S.L. 0.110 24.074 4.8 0.110 24.074 4.7 0.110 24.074 4.7 
West S.S.L_Juv 0.494 108.321 4.7 0.494 160.711 4.7 0.494 108.321 4.7 
Resident seals 0.083 17.439 4.5 0.083 17.439 4.5 0.083 17.439 4.6 
Wintering seals #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.069 19.197 4.6 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Shearwater 0.105 73.000 4.5 0.100 73.000 4.5 0.100 73.000 4.5 
Murres 0.169 72.000 4.4 0.169 72.000 4.4 0.169 72.000 4.5 
Kittiwakes 0.076 110.000 4.4 0.077 110.000 4.4 0.077 110.000 4.4 
Auklets 0.169 110.000 3.6 0.169 110.000 3.6 0.169 110.000 3.6 
Puffins 0.040 73.000 4.4 0.040 73.000 4.4 0.040 73.000 4.4 
Fulmars 0.055 73.000 4.6 0.055 73.000 4.6 0.055 73.000 4.6 
Storm Petrels 0.120 144.000 4.3 0.120 144.000 4.3 0.120 144.000 4.3 
Cormorants 0.159 73.000 4.5 0.159 73.000 4.5 0.159 73.000 4.5 
Gulls 0.166 73.000 4.5 0.166 73.000 4.5 0.166 73.000 4.5 
Albatross Jaeger 0.068 75.000 4.6 0.068 75.000 4.6 0.068 75.000 4.6 
Sleeper shark 0.100 3.000 4.8 0.100 3.000 4.7 0.100 3.000 4.8 
Salmon shark 0.100 6.000 4.8 #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.100 6.000 4.9 
Dogfish 0.100 3.000 4.3 #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.100 3.000 4.3 
W. Pollock 0.375 4.445 3.9 0.667 3.170 3.7 0.410 3.780 3.7 
W. Pollock_Juv 1.980 6.965 3.6 2.345 5.510 3.5 2.669 6.830 3.6 
P. Cod 0.412 2.280 4.2 0.412 2.280 4.1 0.420 2.190 4.1 
P. Cod_Juv 1.082 5.680 3.7 1.082 5.680 3.6 2.026 4.590 3.7 
Herring 0.320 3.520 3.5 0.320 3.520 3.5 0.400 3.520 3.5 
Herring_Juv 2.370 7.240 3.5 2.370 7.240 3.5 1.419 4.334 3.5 
Arrowtooth 0.297 2.609 4.3 0.180 1.160 4.3 0.260 1.440 4.3 
Arrowtooth_Juv 1.014 3.771 4.0 1.580 3.310 4.0 0.898 2.450 3.9 
Kamchatka fl. 0.297 2.609 4.5 0.180 1.160 4.5 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Kamchatka fl._Juv 1.014 3.771 4.1 1.580 3.310 4.1 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Gr. Turbot 0.180 1.160 4.6 0.180 1.160 4.6 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 1.580 3.310 4.1 1.580 3.310 3.5 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
P. Halibut 0.190 1.100 4.4 0.190 1.100 4.6 0.190 1.100 4.5 
P. Halibut_Juv 0.380 1.420 4.0 0.380 1.420 3.8 0.382 1.420 4.0 
232
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Table C2.  Continued.  
Group AI P/B AI Q/B AI TL EBS P/B EBS Q/B EBS TL GOA P/B GOA Q/B GOA TL 
YF. Sole 0.174 0.930 3.5 0.174 0.930 3.5 0.200 2.000 3.6 
YF. Sole_Juv 0.601 1.740 3.5 0.601 1.740 3.5 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
FH. Sole 0.200 1.970 3.8 0.260 1.970 3.7 0.180 1.690 3.8 
FH. Sole_Juv 0.930 3.130 3.5 0.930 3.130 3.5 1.100 3.130 3.6 
N. Rock sole 0.252 1.705 3.8 0.232 1.140 3.7 0.200 2.000 3.5 
N. Rock sole_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.938 2.310 3.5 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
S. Rock sole 0.252 1.705 4.0 #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.200 2.000 3.5 
AK Plaice 0.200 2.000 3.7 0.200 2.000 3.5 0.200 2.000 3.5 
Dover Sole 0.200 2.000 3.5 0.200 2.000 3.7 0.200 2.000 3.4 
Rex Sole 0.200 2.000 3.5 0.200 2.000 3.7 0.200 2.000 3.5 
Misc. Flatfish 0.200 2.000 3.7 0.200 2.000 3.7 0.200 2.000 3.5 
Alaska skate 0.200 2.000 4.5 0.200 2.000 4.2 0.200 2.000 4.4 
Bering skate 0.200 2.000 3.5 0.200 2.000 4.6 0.200 2.000 3.5 
Aleutian skate 0.200 2.000 4.2 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.3 
Whiteblotched skate 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.1 
Mud skate 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.1 
Longnosed skate 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.5 0.200 2.000 4.7 
Big skate 0.200 2.000 4.0 0.200 2.000 4.5 0.200 2.000 4.3 
Black skate 0.200 2.000 4.2 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.1 
Sablefish 0.190 1.030 3.6 0.190 1.030 4.5 0.190 1.030 4.1 
Sablefish_Juv 1.650 3.320 3.5 1.650 3.320 3.6 1.650 3.320 3.6 
Eelpouts 0.400 2.000 3.6 0.400 2.000 3.5 0.400 2.000 3.6 
Giant Grenadier 0.150 2.000 4.5 0.150 2.000 4.3 0.150 2.000 4.1 
Pacific Grenadier 0.150 2.000 4.5 0.150 2.000 4.3 0.150 2.000 4.1 
Other Macruids 0.150 2.000 4.5 0.150 2.000 4.3 0.150 2.000 4.1 
Misc. fish deep 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.3 0.200 2.000 4.3 
POP 0.206 1.802 3.6 0.100 2.000 3.5 0.090 1.990 3.6 
POP_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 1.100 3.480 3.6 
Sharpchin Rock 0.100 2.000 3.6 0.100 2.000 3.8 0.100 2.000 3.5 
Northern Rock 0.100 2.000 3.6 0.100 2.000 3.6 0.100 2.000 3.5 
Dusky Rock 0.100 2.000 3.5 0.100 2.000 3.5 0.100 2.000 4.0 
Shortraker Rock 0.100 2.000 3.9 0.100 2.000 3.9 0.100 2.000 3.9 
Rougheye Rock 0.100 2.000 3.9 0.100 2.000 4.3 0.100 2.000 3.9 
Shortspine Thorns 0.150 0.500 4.0 0.150 0.500 3.6 0.130 0.440 3.9 
Shortspine Thorns_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.210 0.570 3.7 
Other Sebastes 0.100 2.000 3.8 0.100 2.000 3.8 0.100 2.000 3.8 
Atka mackerel 0.348 5.647 3.7 0.350 5.650 3.5 0.350 5.650 3.5 
Atka mackerel_Juv 1.901 8.897 3.5 1.900 8.900 3.5 1.900 8.900 3.5 
Greenlings 0.400 2.000 3.6 0.400 2.000 4.2 0.400 2.000 4.2 
Lg. Sculpins 0.400 2.000 4.2 0.400 2.000 4.0 0.400 2.000 4.0 
Other sculpins 0.400 2.000 3.6 0.400 2.000 3.9 0.400 2.000 3.9 
Misc. fish shallow 0.400 2.000 3.6 0.400 2.000 3.7 0.400 2.000 3.5 
Octopi 0.800 3.650 3.8 0.800 3.650 3.8 0.800 3.650 3.8 
Squids 3.200 10.670 3.7 3.200 10.670 3.7 3.200 10.670 3.7 
Salmon returning 1.800 12.123 3.8 1.650 11.600 3.8 1.816 11.827 3.8 
Salmon outgoing 1.770 16.005 3.5 1.280 13.560 3.5 1.642 14.386 3.5 
Bathylagidae 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 
Myctophidae 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 
Capelin 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 
Sandlance 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 
Eulachon 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 
Oth. managed forage 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 
Oth. pelagic smelt 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 0.800 3.650 3.5 
233
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C2. Continued.  
Group AI P/B AI Q/B AI TL EBS P/B EBS Q/B EBS TL GOA P/B GOA Q/B GOA TL 
Bairdi 1.000 3.000 3.4 1.000 2.754 3.4 1.000 3.000 3.4 
Bairdi_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A 1.500 3.838 3.2 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
King Crab 0.600 3.000 3.5 0.600 2.700 3.4 0.600 3.000 3.4 
King Crab_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A 1.500 3.700 3.3 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Opilio #N/A #N/A #N/A 1.000 2.901 3.4 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Opilio_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A 1.500 3.830 2.8 #N/A #N/A #N/A 
Pandalidae 0.576 2.410 2.9 0.576 2.409 2.9 0.576 2.410 2.9 
NP shrimp 0.576 2.410 2.9 0.576 2.409 2.9 0.576 2.410 2.9 
Sea stars 1.210 6.050 3.5 1.210 6.050 3.5 1.210 6.050 3.5 
Brittle stars 1.210 6.050 2.2 1.210 6.050 2.2 1.210 6.050 2.2 
Urchins dollars cucumbers 0.610 3.050 2.0 0.610 3.050 2.0 0.610 3.050 2.0 
Snails 1.810 9.050 2.9 1.810 9.050 2.9 1.810 9.050 2.9 
Hermit crabs 0.820 4.100 3.1 0.820 4.100 3.1 0.820 4.100 3.1 
Misc. crabs 0.820 4.100 3.1 0.820 4.100 3.1 0.820 4.100 3.1 
Misc. Crustacean 7.400 37.000 2.5 7.400 37.000 2.5 7.400 37.000 2.5 
Benthic Amphipods 7.400 37.000 2.5 7.400 37.000 2.5 7.400 37.000 2.5 
Anemones 1.000 5.000 2.5 1.000 5.000 2.5 1.000 5.000 2.5 
Corals 0.046 0.230 2.5 0.046 0.230 2.5 0.046 0.230 2.5 
Hydroids 1.000 5.000 2.5 1.000 5.000 2.5 1.000 5.000 2.5 
Urochordata 3.580 17.900 2.5 3.580 17.900 2.5 3.580 17.900 2.5 
Sea Pens 0.092 0.461 2.5 0.092 0.461 2.5 0.092 0.461 2.5 
Sponges 1.000 5.000 2.5 1.000 5.000 2.5 1.000 5.000 2.5 
Bivalves 1.300 6.500 2.5 1.300 6.500 2.5 1.300 6.500 2.5 
Polychaetes 2.970 14.850 2.5 2.970 14.850 2.5 2.970 14.850 2.5 
Misc. worms 2.230 11.150 2.5 2.230 11.150 2.5 2.230 11.150 2.5 
Scyphozoid Jellies 0.880 3.000 3.4 0.880 3.000 3.4 0.880 3.000 3.4 
Fish Larvae 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 
Chaetognaths 5.475 15.643 2.9 5.475 15.643 2.9 5.475 15.643 2.9 
Euphausiids 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 
Mysids 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 
Pelagic Amphipods 2.500 7.143 2.5 2.500 7.143 2.5 2.500 7.143 2.5 
Gelatinous filter feeders 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 
Pteropods 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 5.475 15.643 2.5 
Copepods 6.000 27.740 2.5 6.000 27.740 2.5 6.000 27.740 2.5 
Pelagic microbes 36.500 104.286 2.0 36.500 104.286 2.0 36.500 104.286 2.0 
Benthic microbes 36.500 104.286 2.0 36.500 104.286 2.0 36.500 104.286 2.0 
Macroalgae 4.000 0.000 1.0 4.000 0.000 1.0 4.000 0.000 1.0 
Lg Phytoplankton 166.500 0.000 1.0 101.794 0.000 1.0 166.481 0.000 1.0 
Sm Phytoplankton 113.400 0.000 1.0 110.919 0.000 1.0 113.378 0.000 1.0 
Outside Production 1.000 0.000 1.0 1.000 0.000 1.0 1.000 0.000 1.0 
Discards 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 
Offal 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 
Pelagic Detritus 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 
Benthic Detritus 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 
Outside Detritus 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 0.000 0.000 1.0 
234
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
Table C3.  	Total removals (t) as retained catch and discards in each system. Retained catch for target species 
processed at sea is the product of the raw retained catch times the published product recovery 
rate for that species; processing waste (“offal”) calculated by this method was added to Discarded 
catch. 
Group AI Ret AI Disc EBS Ret EBS Disc GOA Ret GOA Disc 
Transient Killers 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Sperm and beaked whales 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Resident Killers 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.90 0.00 0.21 
Porpoises 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.44 0.04 0.04 
Belugas #N/A #N/A 12.52 0.01 #N/A #N/A 
Gray Whales #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 0.03 0.00 
Humpbacks 0.00 0.00 0.00 8.29 0.00 0.00 
Fin Whales 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 15.16 
Sei whales 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Right whales 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Minke whales 0.00 0.00 0.09 1.19 0.00 0.00 
Bowhead Whales #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
Sea Otters 0.00 0.04 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 
Walrus Bd Seals #N/A #N/A 15.33 2.96 #N/A #N/A 
N. Fur Seal #N/A #N/A 18.26 0.08 0.00 0.00 
N. Fur Seal_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 0.04 0.00 
Central S.S.L. #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 6.90 0.92 
Central S.S.L._Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.66 0.00 
West S.S.L. 5.90 0.84 24.34 2.57 3.23 0.20 
West S.S.L_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.42 0.00 
Resident seals 1.79 0.01 7.36 0.14 15.23 0.06 
Wintering seals #N/A #N/A 15.70 0.16 #N/A #N/A 
Shearwater 0.00 0.52 0.00 0.77 0.00 0.09 
Murres 0.00 0.39 0.01 15.68 0.00 1.92 
Kittiwakes 0.00 0.14 0.00 1.28 0.00 0.35 
Auklets 0.00 2.33 0.00 3.38 0.00 0.12 
Puffins 0.00 1.19 0.00 0.91 0.00 2.57 
Fulmars 0.00 1.41 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.33 
Storm Petrels 0.00 1.02 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.09 
Cormorants 0.00 0.31 0.00 0.29 0.00 0.14 
Gulls 0.00 0.17 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.23 
Albatross Jaeger 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.19 0.00 0.09 
Sleeper shark 0.00 75.31 7.70 345.37 0.02 397.82 
Salmon shark 0.37 8.29 #N/A #N/A 0.91 135.51 
Dogfish 0.00 0.42 #N/A #N/A 50.68 1,200.96 
W. Pollock 10,167.08 49,162.78 200,801.13 1,045,743.25 18,048.90 82,016.95 
W. Pollock_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
P. Cod 13,901.69 13,419.17 111,320.38 98,530.91 35,561.47 37,639.98 
P. Cod_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Herring 0.00 0.01 10,693.91 3,788.60 14,732.40 1,482.71 
Herring_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Arrowtooth 135.33 1,397.88 2,922.84 14,988.43 1,182.72 18,684.58 
Arrowtooth_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Kamchatka fl. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
Kamchatka fl._Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
Gr. Turbot 1,465.03 1,245.60 2,055.40 2,392.77 #N/A #N/A 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
P. Halibut 2,692.04 451.12 4,000.00 5,676.57 24,183.91 4,510.03 
P. Halibut_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
235
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C3. Continued.  
Group AI Ret AI Disc EBS Ret EBS Disc GOA Ret GOA Disc 
YF. Sole 0.00 1.97 68,258.50 49,047.33 41.82 28.56 
YF. Sole_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
FH. Sole 0.19 14.04 3,197.00 10,999.46 1,282.96 841.52 
FH. Sole_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
N. Rock sole 71.57 180.82 19,764.14 36,146.65 1,083.89 770.11 
N. Rock sole_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
S. Rock sole 0.72 1.83 #N/A #N/A 1,084.13 770.11 
AK Plaice 0.00 0.00 3,379.26 11,625.17 0.35 1.13 
Dover Sole 0.00 1.39 0.17 0.46 4,957.10 2,516.67 
Rex Sole 0.38 3.93 253.40 85.64 2,031.55 811.22 
Misc. Flatfish 2.79 36.56 805.55 2,771.55 2,643.32 2,418.84 
Alaska skate 13.84 790.38 1,835.74 10,218.03 4.38 27.43 
Bering skate 0.00 0.00 167.88 972.03 157.84 476.03 
Aleutian skate 8.62 492.35 114.30 656.69 8.77 136.66 
Whiteblotched skate 13.01 743.04 11.66 64.86 4.38 6.97 
Mud skate 1.55 88.73 2.87 15.94 #N/A #N/A 
Longnosed skate #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 306.91 1,347.16 
Big skate #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 394.81 1,445.73 
Black skate #N/A #N/A 0.13 0.72 #N/A #N/A 
Sablefish 1,033.92 488.35 1,328.70 46.87 11,889.55 6,256.63 
Sablefish_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Eelpouts 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2.23 4.85 
Giant Grenadier 16.07 5,327.80 18.09 2,112.31 73.85 10,798.35 
Pacific Grenadier 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.04 5.45 
Other Macruids 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.71 103.62 
Misc. fish deep 60.17 132.45 0.00 0.00 92.85 268.44 
POP 5,249.42 3,965.83 4,127.86 974.43 2,148.50 2,452.71 
POP_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 
Sharpchin Rock 101.90 90.73 36.18 12.96 3,477.85 3,181.73 
Northern Rock 329.05 2,837.09 687.51 210.47 2,298.84 2,499.35 
Dusky Rock 4.72 19.96 3.35 6.66 1,792.19 1,055.26 
Shortraker Rock 221.21 264.87 121.09 1.94 600.26 350.67 
Rougheye Rock 623.73 282.47 75.78 1.94 620.93 350.39 
Shortspine Thorns 123.91 3.56 63.44 4.68 1,016.90 454.06 
Shortspine Thorns_Juv #N/A #N/A #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 
Other Sebastes 168.72 103.57 164.98 189.82 279.00 120.87 
Atka mackerel 29,534.79 18,392.55 1,008.37 1,543.52 4,060.70 191.32 
Atka mackerel_Juv 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Greenlings 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 14.51 0.00 
Lg. Sculpins 8.52 2,007.16 284.92 4,667.30 56.45 1,241.82 
Other sculpins 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Misc. fish shallow 60.17 132.45 5.60 17.78 93.29 268.44 
Octopi 77.95 74.27 39.67 113.58 48.21 48.99 
Squids 48.14 434.60 225.99 434.80 34.83 65.89 
Salmon returning 23.49 9.88 84,034.48 333.59 84,756.19 8,688.33 
Salmon outgoing 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Bathylagidae 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Myctophidae 0.14 0.26 0.12 0.10 0.00 0.00 
Capelin 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.00 49.60 6.03 
Sandlance 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.02 0.12 0.02 
Eulachon 0.00 0.00 0.80 0.96 52.68 6.03 
Oth. managed forage 0.00 1.90 0.20 2.40 0.57 2.56 
Oth. pelagic smelt 0.00 0.02 28.65 25.45 11.62 1.34 
236
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Table C3. Continued. 
Group AI Ret AI Disc EBS Ret EBS Disc GOA Ret GOA Disc 
Bairdi 0.00 3.69 23,562.35 961.26 1,024.04 53.04 
Bairdi_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
King Crab 2,843.00 21.52 9,340.89 397.60 20.91 2.01 
King Crab_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
Opilio #N/A #N/A 149,385.12 3,398.12 #N/A #N/A 
Opilio_Juv #N/A #N/A 0.00 0.00 #N/A #N/A 
Pandalidae 0.00 0.16 0.11 0.99 57.17 0.70 
NP shrimp 0.00 0.16 0.00 0.00 0.90 0.70 
Sea stars 0.01 36.26 19.23 3,223.67 2.70 906.60 
Brittle stars 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Urchins dollars cucumbers 0.01 8.25 0.17 32.58 1.02 21.66 
Snails 0.00 0.00 0.09 8.96 0.10 0.00 
Hermit crabs 0.00 0.00 1.64 144.92 0.00 0.00 
Misc. crabs 0.68 4.02 171.69 0.17 8.40 15.01 
Misc. Crustacean 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Benthic Amphipods 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Anemones 0.00 2.26 0.21 191.14 0.12 21.57 
Corals 0.13 61.70 0.07 9.22 0.87 5.03 
Hydroids 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Urochordata 0.00 1.42 3.02 748.11 0.00 1.97 
Sea Pens 0.00 0.35 0.09 3.37 0.00 2.05 
S p o n g e s 0 . 1 5 2 7 7 . 3 2 0 . 9 5 3 2 1 . 5 9 0 . 0 8 6 . 0 8 
Bivalves 0.00 0.00 0.01 0.06 81.91 0.00 
Polychaetes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Misc. worms 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Scyphozoid Jellies 1.30 1.40 1,671.65 7,586.88 41.22 57.17 
Fish Larvae 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Chaetognaths 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Euphausiids 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Mysids 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Pelagic Amphipods 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Gelatinous filter feeders 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Pteropods 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Copepods 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Pelagic microbes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Benthic microbes 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Macroalgae 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Lg Phytoplankton 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
Sm Phytoplankton 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 
237
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
Table C4. Sea otter diets in the Aleutian Islands (AI) and Eastern Bering Sea / Gulf of Alaska (EBS/GOA). 
See main text for “preference” diet calculations which distribute a percentage of the diet over 
multiple prey groups using prey biomass, and Appendix A for sources. Rounding diet percentages 
may cause column totals to be slightly more or less than 100. 
AI sea otter prey % by weight EBS/GOA sea otter prey % by weight 
Urchins, dollars, and cucumbers 60.0 Urchins, dollars, and cucumbers 75.0 Preference 
Misc. crabs 
W. pollock 
W. pollock juv 
P. cod juv 
Herring 
Herring juv 
Misc. shallow fish 18.7 P. halibut juv 20.0 Preference 
Other Sebastes 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed forage 
Other pelagic smelt 
Greenlings 
Sand lance 10.3 Preference Squids 5.00 
Managed forage 
Octopus 
NP shrimp 
Sea stars 
Snails 
Misc. crabs 8.00 Preference 
Misc. crustaceans 
Bivalves 
Polychaetes 
Misc. worms etc. 
238
 
 
 
  
  
 
        
  
   
   
  
 
   
  
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
    
  
     
   
  
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
  
Table C5.	 Steller sea lion (SSL) diets, percent by weight, in the Aleutian Islands (AI) Eastern Bering Sea 
(EBS), Western Gulf of Alaska (WGOA), and Central Gulf of Alaska (CGOA). See main text for 
“preference” (P) diet calculations which distribute a percentage of the diet over multiple prey 
groups using prey biomass, and Appendix A for sources. 
AI SSL prey % EBS SSL prey % WGOA SSL prey % CGOA SSL prey % 
Atka mackerel 65.2 W. pollock 
W. pollock juv* 32.9P W. pollock 
W. pollock juv* 39.9P W. pollock 
W. pollock juv* 40.4P 
Octopus 18.0 Salmon outgoing 
Salmon returning 17.7P Salmon outgoing 
Salmon returning 20.2P 
W. pollock 
P. cod 
Misc. shallow fish 
W. pollock juv* 
P. cod juv* 
15.0P 
Yellowfin sole juv 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole juv 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
12.0P 
Herring 
Herring juv* 7.5P Arrowtooth  
Arrowtooth juv* 16.9P 
Atka mackerel 6.6 Sand lance  3.9 
Sand lance 5.0 Other pelagic smelt 3.0 
Salmon outgoing 
Salmon returning 7.9P P. cod 7.0 Misc. shallow fish 3.6 Misc. shallow fish 2.9 
Octopus 
Squids 6.8P Capelin 6.0 P. cod 
P. cod juv* 3.1P Herring 
Herring juv* 2.8P 
Alaska skate 
Bering skate 
Aleutian skate 
Whiteblotched 
Other sculpins 6.0 Arrowtooth  
Arrowtooth juv* 2.5P P. cod 
P. cod juv* 2.0P 
Sand lance 4.0 Large sculpins 2.3 Octopus 
Squids 1.6P 
skate 
Mud skate Squids 3.0 N rock sole 
S rock sole 2.0P Capelin 1.1 
Pacific ocean perch 
Sharpchin rockfish 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rockfish 
Rougheye rockfish 
Shortspine 
thornyhead 
Other Sebastes 
4.3P Misc. shallow fish 3.0 Managed forage 1.3 Sablefish+ 
Sablefish juv* 0.9 
Herring juv 3.0 Octopus 
Squids 1.3P Flathead sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole  
Flathead sole juv* 
0.8P 
Eelpouts 1.0 Greenlings 1.1 
Pandalids 
NP shrimp 1.0P Pacific ocean perch 
Sharpchin rockfish 
Halibut 
Halibut juv* 0.6P 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Herring 
Herring juv* 
0.8P 
Tanner crab 
King crab 
Snow crab 
Hermit crab 
Misc. crab 
1.0P 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Other Sebastes 
Shortraker rockfish+ 
Rougheye rockfish+ 
Shortspine 
thornyhead+ 
0.9P 
Pacific ocean perch 
Sharpchin rockfish 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Other Sebastes 
Shortraker rockfish+ 
Rougheye rockfish+ 
Shortspine 
thornyhead+ 
0.5P 
Salmon outgoing 0.5 Polychaetes 0.8 
Salmon returning 0.5 
Pacific ocean perch 
Sharpchin rockfish 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rockfish 
Rougheye rockfish 
Shortspine 
thornyhead 
Other Sebastes 
0.4P 
Big skate 
Longnose skate 
Alaska skate 
Bering skate 
Aleutian skate 
0.7P 
Big skate 
Longnose skate 
Alaska skate 
Bering skate 
Aleutian skate 
0.5P 
Flathead sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole  
Flathead sole juv* 
0.7P 
Managed forage 0.5 
Polychaetes 0.5 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 0.3P 
Atka mackerel 0.1 Bathylagidae 0.6 Eulachon 0.3 
Snails 0.1 Halibut 
Halibut juv* 0.6P Myctophidae 0.2 
239
 
 
 
        
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
AI SSL prey % EBS SSL prey % WGOA SSL prey % CGOA SSL prey % 
Bivalves 0.1 Capelin 0.5 Large sculpins 0.2 
Other sculpins 0.3 
Other pelagic smelt 0.3 
Yellowfin sole 0.3 
Misc. flatfish 0.2 
Shearwater 
Murre 
Kittiwake 
Auklet 
Puffin 
Fulmar 0.2P 
Storm Petrel 
Cormorants 
Gulls 
Albatross Jaeger 
Sablefish+ 
Sablefish juv* 0.2 
Eulachon 0.1 
*prey eaten only by juvenile SSL 
+prey eaten only by adult SSL 
240
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
    
   
   
  
   
   
   
    
   
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
    
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
   
     
 
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C6. Pinniped diets, percent by weight, in the Aleutian Islands (AI) Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA). See main text for 
“preference” (P) diet calculations which distribute a percentage of the diet over multiple prey groups using prey biomass, and Appendix A 
for sources. Rounding diet percentages may cause column totals to be slightly more or less than 100. 
Walrus/bearded 
seal prey % EBS N. fur seal
 prey % GOA N. fur seal
 prey % EBS/AI resident 
seals prey % GOA resident 
seals prey % Wintering seals prey % 
Bivalves 70.15 W. pollock juv 30.0 Capelin 38.0 Pandalid shrimp 
Non-pand. shr. 15.0P W. pollock 
W. pollock juv 42.6P W. pollock 
W. pollock juv 49.6P 
Misc. worm etc. 18.0 Squid 30.0 Sand lance 34.0 W. pollock 
W. pollock juv 14.3P Herring 
Herring juv 32.4P Misc. shallow fish 10.0 
Snails 6.0 Capelin 15.3 W. pollock 
W. pollock juv* 8.5P Misc. shallow fish 13.5 Misc. shallow fish 9.7 Capelin 8.6Octopus 10.0 
Pandalid shrimp 
Non-pand. shrimp 2.0P Yellowfin so. juv 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole juv 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
8.0P 
Squid 6.5 Yellowfin so. juv 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole juv 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
8.0P 
Salmon returning 4.0 Other sculpins 8.0 
P. cod 
P. cod juv* 
Arrowtooth 
Arrowtooth juv* 
Halibut 
Halibut juv* 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv* 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
Sablefish 
Sablefish juv 
Eelpouts 
Atka mackerel 
Atka mack juv* 
Greenlings 
Large sculpins 
Other sculpins 
Misc. shallow fish 
Salmon outgoing 
Bathylagidae 
Myctophidae 
Eulachon 
Managed forage 
Oth. Pelagic smelt 
5.5P 
Eelpouts 
Atka mackerel 
Atka mack juv 
Greenlings 
2.7P 
Eelpouts 6.1 
Octopus 1.0 Pandalid shrimp 
Non-pand. shrimp 5.5P 
Tanner crab 
King crab 
Snow crab 
Hermit crab 
Misc. crab 
1.0P 
Octopus 
Squid 2.1P Herring juv 4.5 
Herring juv 6.0 Capelin 5.5 P. cod 
P. cod juv 1.6P Yellowfin so. juv 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole juv 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
4.0P 
Myctophidae 4.0 Other sculpins 5.0 Large sculpins 
Other sculpins 1.2P 
Wintering seals 0.10 Salmon returning 1.0 Eelpouts 5.0 Arrowtooth  
Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
1.2P 
Salmon outgoing 1.0 P. cod juv 4.0 
Sand lance 1.0 Herring juv 2.5 Misc. worm etc. 2.65 
P. cod juv 0.70 Squid 2.5 Octopus 1.0 
Sablefish juv 0.50 Atka mackerel 1.0 
4.01 
Hermit crab 
Misc. crab 1.0P 
Atka mackerel 0.50 Tanner crab 
King crab 
Snow crab 
Hermit crab 
Misc. crab 
1.0P 
P. cod juv 0.5 
Other sculpins 0.10 Squid 0.05 
Octopus 0.10 
Pacific o. perch 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 
Rougheye rf. 
Sh. thornyhead 
Other Sebastes 
0.1P 
Pacific o. perch 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 
Rougheye rf. 
Sh. thornyhead 
Other Sebastes 
0.4P 
Pacific o. perch 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 
Rougheye rf. 
Other Sebastes 
1.1P 
241

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
     
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Walrus/bearded 
seal prey % EBS N. fur seal
 prey % GOA N. fur seal
 prey % EBS/AI resident 
seals prey % GOA resident 
seals prey % Wintering seals prey % 
Herring 
Herring juv* 3.5P Salmon returning 0.25 Sand lance 0.8 
Salmon returning 2.0 Salmon outgoing 0.25 Capelin 
Eulachon 
Managed forage 
Oth. Pelagic smelt 
0.4P 
Pacific o. perch 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 
Rougheye rf. 
Other Sebastes 
2.0P 
Pandalid shrimp 
Non-pand. sh. 
Tanner crab 
King crab 
Snow crab 
Hermit crab 
Misc. crab 
0.2P 
*prey eaten only by juvenile N fur seals
1 diet percentage in the AI 
242

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Table C7. Toothed whales diet percent by weight, in the Aleutian Islands (AI) Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA). See main text for 
“preference” (P) diet calculations which distribute a percentage of the diet over multiple prey groups using prey biomass, and Appendix A 
for sources. Rounding diet percentages may cause column totals to be slightly more or less than 100. 
Transient killer 
whale prey % Sperm/beaked
 whale prey % Resident killer 
whale prey % AI Porpoise prey % EBS porpoise prey % GOA propoise prey % 
Porpoises 
Belugas 
Gray whales 
Humpback 
whales 
Fin whales 
Sei whales 
Right whales 
Minke whales 
Bowhead whales 
Sea otters 
N. fur seal 
N. fur seal juv 
Steller sea lion 
Steller sea lion 
juv 
Resident seals 
100P 
Squid 85.0 W. pollock 
W. pollock juv 
P. cod 
P. cod juv 
Herring 
Herring juv 
Arrowtooth 
Arrowtooth juv 
Kamchatka 
Kamchatka juv 
Gr. turbot 
Gr. turbot juv 
P. Halibut 
P. Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Yellowfin so. juv 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sold juv 
N. rock sole 
S. rock sole 
Alaska plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
Squid 
Salmon returning 
Salmon outgoing 
Bathylagidae 
Myctophidae 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
100P 
Squid 90.0 Squid 50.0 Squid 69.3 
Sleeper sharks 
P. cod 
Alaska skate 
Bering skate 
Aleutian skate 
Whiteblotched skate 
Mud skate 
Sablefish 
Sablefish juv 
Eelpouts 
Giant grenadier 
Pacific grenadier 
Other Macrourids 
Misc. deep fish 
Pacific o. perch 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 
Rougheye rf. 
Sh. thornyhead 
Other Sebastes 
15.0P 
Bathylagidae 
Myctophidae 
Capelin 
Sandlance 
Eulachon 
Managed Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
10.0P 
Other sculpins 
Misc shallow fish 
Salmon returning 
Salmon outgoing 
Bathylagidae 
Myctophidae 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
50P 
Bathylagidae 
Myctophidae 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
18.5P 
Eelpouts 
Other sculpins 
Misc. shallow fish 
12.2P 
243

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
     
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C8. Baleen whales diet percent by weight, in the Aleutian Islands (AI) Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA). See main text for 
“preference” (P) diet calculations which distribute a percentage of the diet over multiple prey groups using prey biomass, and Appendix A 
for sources. Rounding diet percentages may cause column totals to be slightly more or less than 100. 
Grey whale 
 prey % Humpback 
whale prey % Fin whale
 prey % Sei whale
 prey % Right whale 
 prey % Minke whale
 prey % Bowhead whale
 prey % 
Benthic 
amphipods 90.0
Chaetognaths 
Euphausiids 
Mysids 
Pel. 
amphipods 
Pteropods 
59.9 
P 
Chaetognaths 
Euphausiids 
Mysids 
Pel. 
amphipods 
Pteropods 
60.0 
P 
 Copepods 80.0 Copepods 95.0 
W. pollock 
juv 
Herring juv 
Salmon 
returning 
Salmon 
outgoing 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed 
Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
56.0 
P 
Chaetognaths 
Euphausiids 
Mysids 
Pel. amphipods 
Pteropods 
55.0 
P 
Tanner crab 
King crab 
Snow crab 
Pandalid shrimp 
Non-pand. shrimp 
Sea star 
Brittle star 
Urchins dollars 
and cucumbers 
Snails 
Hermit crabs 
Misc. crabs 
Misc. Crustacean 
Anemones 
Corals 
Benth. Hydroid 
Benth. 
Urochordata 
Sea Pens 
Sponge 
Bivalves 
Polychaete 
Misc. Worm. Etc. 
10.0 
P 
W. pollock 
juv 
Herring juv 
Salmon 
returning 
Salmon 
outgoing 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed 
Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
10.0 
P 
Chaetognaths 
Euphausiids 
Mysids 
Pel. 
amphipods 
Pteropods 
5.0 
P 
W. pollock juv 
Herring juv 
Atka mack juv 
Misc. shallow 
fish 
Salmon 
returning 
Salmon 
outgoing 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed 
Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
39.9 
P 
Copepods 20.0 
Copepods 40.0 
Tanner crab 
Tanner crab juv 
King crab 
King crab juv 
Snow crab 
Snow crab juv 
Pandalid shrimp 
Non Pand. shrimp 
Sea star 
Brittle star 
Urchins dollars 
and cucumbers 
Snails 
Hermit crabs 
Misc. crabs 
Misc. Crustacean 
Benth. amphipods 
Anemones 
Corals 
Benth. Hydroid 
Benth. 
Urochordata 
Sea pens 
Sponge 
Bivalves 
Polychaete 
Misc. Worm. Etc. 
W. pollock juv 
Herring juv 
Misc. shallow 
fish 
Salmon 
returning 
Salmon 
outgoing 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed 
Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
20.0 
P 
Chaetognaths 
Euphausiids 
Mysids 
Pel. 
amphipods 
Pteropods 
40.0 
P 
Chaetognaths 
Euphausiids 
Mysids 
Pel. 
amphipods 
Pteropods 
5.0 
P 
Squid 2.0 
Copepods 2.0 
Squid 0.5 Squid 5.0 
Copepods 0.5 
244

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
       
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C9. Sharks diet percent by weight, in the Aleutian Islands (AI) Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), and Gulf of 
Alaska (GOA). See main text for “preference” (P) diet calculations which distribute a percentage 
of the diet over multiple prey groups using prey biomass, and Appendix A for sources. Rounding 
diet percentages may cause column totals to be slightly more or less than 100. 
EBS sleeper shark 
prey % GOA/AI sleeper 
shark prey % Salmon shark prey % Dogfish prey % 
W. pollock 20.0 Arrowtooth fl.  67.2 Salmon returning 39.6 W. pollock 
W. pollock juv 
P. cod 
P. cod juv 
Misc. shallow fish 
15.4P Giant grenadier 20.0 Offal 12.3 Sablefish 36.0 
Squids 20.0 W. pollock 5.2 P. halibut juv 11.0 
Arrowtooth fl. 
Kamchatka fl. 
Gr. turbot 
P. halibut 
20.0P 
Octopus 4.6 Squids 7.0 Herring 14.2 
Salmon returning 4.5 Greenlings 
Large sculpins 
Other sculpins 
Misc. fish shallow 
4.0P 
Euphausiids 12.9 
Pacific o. perch 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Arrowtooth fl. 
Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
11.2P 
Offal 10.0 
Salmon returning 5.0 Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 2.1P Dogfish 1.0 
Misc. shallow fish 2.0 Rougheye rf. 
Sh. thornyhead 
Other Sebastes 
Pacific o. perch 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 
Rougheye rf. 
Sh. thornyhead 
Other Sebastes 
1.0P 
Octopus 2.0 
Pandalid shrimp 0.25 Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 1.1P 
Non-Pandalid 
shrimp 0.25 
Snails 0.25 
Hermit crabs 0.25 S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc flatfish 
Herring 0.4 Chaetognaths 
Mysids 
Pel. amphipods 
Pteropods 
Copepods 
9.1P 
Flathead sole 1.0 Pandalid shrimp 7.6 
Squids 0.8 Misc. crabs 6.7 
Snails 0.7 Eulachon 3.7 
Misc. shallow fish 0.5 Tanner crab 
King crab 
Non Pand. shrimp 
Sea star 
Brittle star 
Non-Pandalid 
shrimp 0.01 
Hermit crabs 0.01 
Snails 
Hermit crabs 
Anemones 
Benth. Hydroid 
Bivalves 
Polychaete 
Misc. Worm. Etc. 
2.9P 
Octopus 2.9 
Pacific o. perch 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 
Rougheye rf. 
Sh. thornyhead 
Other Sebastes 
2.8P 
245
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
EBS sleeper shark 
prey % GOA/AI sleeper 
shark prey % Salmon shark prey % Dogfish prey % 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 2.3 
Dogfish 
Alaska skate 
Bering skate 
Aleutian skate 
Whiteblotched skate 
Mud skate 
Longnose skate 
Big skate 
2.0P 
Squids 1.8 
Misc. worm etc. 1.2 
Scyphozoid jellies 1.2 
Sand lance 1.1 
Benthic amphipods 0.6 
Urchins dollars and 
cucumbers 0.3 
Misc. Crustacean 0.1 
246
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
  
     
 
     
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Table C10. Skates diet percent by weight, in the Aleutian Islands (AI) and Gulf of Alaska (GOA). See main text for “preference” (P) diet calculations 
which distribute a percentage of the diet over multiple prey groups using prey biomass, and Appendix A for sources. Rounding diet 
percentages may cause column totals to be slightly more or less than 100. 
GOA/AI Alaska  
skate  prey % GOA Bering 
skate prey % GOA Aleutian 
skate  prey % GOA other  
skates prey % Longnose  
skate prey % GOA/AI Big 
skate prey % 
Benthic amphipods 16.8 Benthic 
amphipods 80.5 Pandalid shrimp 26.4 Squids 26.5 W. pollock juv 
P. cod 
P. cod juv 
Herring 
Herring juv 
Sablefish juv 
Eelpouts 
Atka mackerel 
Atka mack. juv 
Greenlings 
Large sculpins 
Other sculpins 
Misc. shallow fish 
Salmon returning 
Salmon outgoing 
Bathylagidae 
Myctophidae 
Capelin 
Sandlance 
Eulachon 
Managed Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
47.5P 
Non-Pandalid 
shrimp 44.1 
Atka mackerel 12.2 Misc. worms etc. 10.5 Squids 14.6 Benthic amphipods 25.7 Arrowtooth fl. 
Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Misc. flatfish 
17.4P 
Octopus 12.2 Pandalid shrimp 2.8 W. pollock juv 
P. cod 
P. cod juv 
Herring 
Herring juv 
Arrowtooth fl. 
Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
Sablefish 
Sablefish juv 
Misc. shallow fish 
Pacific o. perch 
Pacific o. perch 
juv 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Shortraker rf. 
Rougheye rf. 
Sh. thornyhead 
Sh. thornyhead juv 
Other Sebastes 
Atka mack. juv 
Greenlings 
9.8P W. pollock juv 
P. cod 
P. cod juv 
Herring 
Herring juv 
Arrowtooth fl. 
Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
Sablefish 
Sablefish juv 
Misc. shallow fish 
Eelpouts 
Giant grenadier 
Pacific grenadier 
Pacific o. perch 
Pacific o. perch juv 
Sharpchin rf. 
Northern rockfish 
Dusky rockfish 
Rougheye rf. 
Sh. thornyhead 
Sh. thornyhead juv 
Other Sebastes 
Atka mack. juv 
10.4P 
Squids 11.8 Squids 1.7 
P. cod 
P. cod juv 
Herring 
Herring juv 
Arrowtooth fl. 
Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
Sablefish juv 
Eelpouts 
Greenlings 
Capelin 
Sand lance 
Eulachon 
Managed forage 
Oth. pelagic smelt 
7.9P 
Non-Pand. shrimp 1.1 
Misc. Crustacean 0.9 
Polychaetes 0.9 
Benthic detritus 0.9 
Brittle star 0.3 
W. pollock 
W. pollock juv 
P. cod 
P. cod juv 
Herring 
Herring juv 
Arrowtooth fl. 
Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Rex sole 
Misc. flatfish 
Sablefish juv 
Eelpouts 
 Atka mackerel 
Atka mack. juv 
Greenlings 
0.2P Sand lance 12.1 
W. pollock juv 
P. cod 
P. cod juv 
Herring 
Herring juv 
Sablefish juv 
Atka mack. juv 
Greenlings 
Large sculpins 
Other sculpins 
Salmon returning 
Salmon outgoing 
Capelin 
Eulachon 
Managed Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
11.8P 
Rex sole 25.4 
Arrowtooth fl. 
Arrowtooth juv 
Halibut 
Halibut juv 
Yellowfin sole 
Flathead sole 
Flathead sole juv 
N rock sole 
S rock sole 
AK plaice 
Dover sole 
Misc. flatfish 
25.0P 
Other sculpins 7.9 Eelpouts 10.0 
Tanner crabs 7.9 Benthic detritus 1.3 
W. pollock 
W. pollock juv 3.9P Mysid 1.0 
Large sculpins 3.9 Misc. shallow fish 0.9 
247

 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
   
    
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
   
 
   
  
    
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
GOA/AI Alaska  
skate  prey % GOA Bering 
skate prey % GOA Aleutian 
skate  prey % GOA other  
skates prey % Longnose  
skate prey % GOA/AI Big 
skate prey % 
Misc. shallow fish 3.9 Large sculpins 
Other sculpins 
Misc. shallow fish 
Bathylagidae 
Myctophidae 
Capelin 
Sandlance 
Eulachon 
Managed Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
 Greenlings 
Capelin 
Sandlance 
Eulachon 
Managed Forage 
Oth pel. smelt 
Non-Pandalid 
shrimp 2.1 Octopus 0.5 
Bathylagidae 3.9 Bivalves 0.4 
Non-Pandalid 
shrimp 3.9 Hermit crabs 0.2 Misc. Crustacean 0.2 
Hermit crabs 3.9 Benthic 
amphipods 0.1 
Tanner crabs 8.8 Pandalid shrimp 9.8 Misc. crabs 0.1 
Other sculpins 7.7 Tanner crabs 4.3 
Benthic amphipods 6.5 Atka mackerel 3.5 
Misc. shallow fish 5.4 Hermit crabs 3.0 
Octopus 4.7 Octopus 2.9 
Atka mackerel 4.3 Polychaetes 2.7 
W. pollock 3.0 Benthic detritus 2.7 
Misc. worm etc. 2.5 Misc. worm, etc. 1.8 
Benthic detritus 2.5 Other sculpins 1.5 
Large sculpins 1.3 Myctophidae 1.1 
Eelpouts 0.8 W. pollock 0.9 
Bering skate 0.4 Bathylagidae 0.8 
Non-Pandalid 
shrimp 0.4 Non-Pandalid 
shrimp 0.7 
Hermit crabs 0.4 Mysids 0.4 
Polychaetes 0.4 Misc. shallow fish 0.3 
Shortraker rf. 0.2 
Misc. Crustacean 0.2 
Other Macrourids 0.1 
Large sculpins 0.1 
King crabs 0.1 
Bivalves 0.1 
248

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
Table C11. Skate diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS) and Aleutian Islands (AI), from diet data (direct 
query method, see Appendix B for details). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet, blanks are not in 
diet. 
Bering Aleutian 
AK skate skate skate Big skate Bering Aleutian Whitebl. Mud 
Skate prey EBS EBS EBS EBS skate AI skate AI skate AI skate AI 
W. pollock juv 0.16% 41.67% 
W. pollock 40.47% 84.18% 16.71% 8.45% 14.29% 
P. cod juv 0.92% 
P. cod    0.64% 
Herring   0.19% 
Arrowtooth fl. 2.63% 
Kamchatka fl. 
Gr. Turbot 
P. halibut juv 0.13% 
P. halibut 0.00% 
Yellowfin sole juv 0.01% 
Yellowfin sole 0.68% 5.70% 41.08% 
Flathead sole 0.00% 
N. rock sole juv 0.02% 
N. rock sole 8.49% 3.67% 
Misc. flatfish 0.17% 
Giant grenadier 
Eelpouts 8.71% 7.54% 
Atka mackerel 26.49% 
Large sculpins 0.00% 
Other sculpins 2.36% 0.32% 6.78% 
Misc. shallow fish 0.37% 6.06% 0.01% 
Octopus 0.04% 
Squids 0.00% 1.83% 83.36% 
Salmon returning 2.55% 
Bathylagidae 1.20% 
Myctophidae 0.10% 0.02% 
Sandlance 2.92% 0.02% 
Managed forage 0.26% 0.09% 
Tanner crab juv 0.09% 
Tanner crab 0.41% 1.29% 6.92% 45.11% 0.96% 
King crab 8.72% 58.33% 2.05% 
Snow crab juv 0.31% 33.09% 
Snow crab 2.81% 0.37% 3.46% 5.37% 
Pandalid shrimp 0.13% 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 6.46% 0.20% 19.96% 
Sea star 0.06% 
Brittle star 0.01% 0.30% 
Urchins dollars and cucumbers 0.00% 9.29% 
Snails 0.03% 13.20% 0.43% 1.87% 
Hermit crabs 2.16% 1.03% 35.54% 5.77% 0.00% 0.00% 
Misc crabs 0.08% 3.90% 0.13% 
Misc. Crustacean 0.00% 
Benthic amphipods 0.88% 0.45% 0.61% 
Benth. Urochordata 0.00% 
Sea pens 71.29% 0.02% 
Sponge 0.00% 
Bivalves 0.00% 
Polychates 0.27% 0.62% 
Misc. worm etc. 0.01% 
Scyphozoid jellies 0.00% 0.04% 0.85% 
Fish larvae 1.03% 0.09% 0.88% 
Euphausiids 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 
Mysids 0.05% 0.02% 
Unidentified prey 4.20% 11.80% 
Offal 15.44% 0.26% 
249
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
   
  
  
  
 
  
  
   
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
Table C12. Pollock and cod diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands (AI), and Gulf of Alaska 
(GOA) from diet query (see Appendix B).Values of 0.00% are trace in diet, blanks are not in diet. 
AI W. EBS W. GOA W. AI W. AI P. cod EBS W. EBS P. EBS P. GOA W. GOA P. GOA P. pollock AI P. cod pollock pollock pollock  juv pollock cod juv cod  pollock  cod juv cod  Prey juv juv juv 
W. pollock juv 0.13% 0.00% 0.98% 4.41% 0.67% 2.87% 1.65% 0.94% 0.21% 0.94% 
W. pollock 0.40% 4.23% 8.51% 25.93% 0.81% 18.79% 
P. cod juv 0.12% 0.03% 0.04% 0.00% 
P. cod 0.10% 0.07% 0.54% 0.00% 0.01% 
Herring juv 0.02% 0.02% 0.00% 0.18% 0.05% 
Herring  0.00% 0.09% 0.04% 0.02% 
Arrowtooth juv 0.01% 0.00% 0.18% 0.05% 0.01% 
Arrowtooth fl. 0.08% 0.07% 0.01% 1.34% 
Kamchatka fl. 0.00% 0.00% 0.01% 
Gr. turbot juv 0.01% 0.01% 0.01% 
Gr. Turbot 0.03% 0.00% 
P. halibut juv 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 
P. halibut 0.00% 0.09% 0.00% 
Yellowfin sole juv 0.02% 
Yellowfin sole 0.00% 0.76% 
Flathead sole juv 0.00% 0.06% 0.04% 0.23% 
Flathead sole 0.04% 0.02% 0.29% 0.01% 0.51% 
N. rock sole juv 0.00% 0.02% 
N. rock sole 0.00% 1.33% 
Alaska plaice 0.00% 0.01% 
Dover sole 0.08% 
Rex sole 0.25% 0.01% 
Misc. flatfish 0.00% 0.13% 0.00% 
Alaska skate 0.00% 
Sablefish juv 0.21% 
Eelpouts 1.39% 0.07% 0.01% 4.00% 0.05% 0.99% 
Other Macrourids 0.03% 0.00% 
Misc. deep fish 0.89% 0.18% 0.00% 0.00% 
Pacific ocean perch juv 0.24% 0.01% 
Pacific ocean perch 0.00% 
Shortspine thornyhead 0.00% 
Other Sebastes 0.00% 
Atka mackerel juv 2.17% 0.01% 
Atka mackerel 1.34% 15.27% 0.20% 0.06% 
Greenlings 0.05% 0.00% 
Large sculpins 0.00% 0.00% 0.15% 
Other sculpins 3.44% 0.06% 0.15% 14.93% 0.00% 0.05% 0.97% 1.07% 0.04% 3.59% 3.27% 
Misc. shallow fish 0.02% 1.53% 0.00% 0.01% 0.03% 0.41% 0.11% 0.44% 
Octopus 0.02% 1.05% 0.00% 0.65% 0.10% 2.31% 
Squids 2.63% 6.10% 0.03% 0.25% 0.09% 0.64% 0.52% 
Salmon returning 0.17% 
Bathylagidae 0.57% 0.09% 0.10% 0.00% 0.00% 
Myctophidae 0.05% 24.30% 3.90% 0.09% 0.25% 0.00% 0.03% 0.04% 
Capelin 0.01% 0.04% 0.08% 0.00% 0.42% 4.41% 3.53% 
Sand lance 0.00% 0.61% 0.14% 0.17% 0.58% 2.39% 1.20% 2.32% 1.26% 
Eulachon 0.00% 0.01% 0.38% 0.18% 
Managed forage 0.00% 1.48% 0.06% 0.33% 0.75% 0.53% 0.05% 1.01% 
Oth pel. smelt 0.00% 
Tanner crab* 0.10% 0.02% 1.72% 2.21% 0.01% 0.00% 1.62% 0.02% 0.04% 0.41% 8.66% 
Tanner crab adu 0.00% 3.19% 
King crab* 0.00% 0.02% 0.00% 0.00% 0.02% 0.02% 0.00% 
King crab adu 0.00% 0.96% 
Snow crab* 0.00% 0.00% 0.13% 1.87% 
Snow crab adu 0.00% 5.52% 
Pandalid shrimp 0.06% 2.68% 4.07% 11.65% 0.05% 3.58% 1.00% 5.30% 0.60% 10.29% 0.07% 9.64% 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 9.81% 1.43% 33.10% 16.66% 0.49% 1.50% 17.66% 7.61% 6.83% 8.09% 16.63% 10.18% 
Sea star 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.02% 0.21% 0.22% 
Brittle star 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 0.01% 0.01% 0.02% 0.03% 
Urchins dollars and 0.01% 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 0.00% 
Snails 0.08% 0.41% 0.03% 0.00% 0.60% 0.01% 0.46% 
Hermit crabs 0.29% 0.04% 0.56% 0.44% 0.04% 0.10% 0.72% 7.03% 8.66% 1.06% 6.37% 10.10% 
Misc crabs 0.00% 3.24% 0.00% 0.03% 0.02% 1.41% 0.15% 0.07% 0.11% 4.98% 
Misc. Crustacean 0.15% 0.20% 0.18% 1.63% 0.11% 0.71% 0.06% 0.06% 0.10% 0.42% 0.40% 
Benthic amphipods 10.85% 7.53% 19.44% 2.92% 5.70% 2.05% 39.21% 2.82% 5.69% 5.99% 45.28% 2.53% 
Benth. Hydroid 0.00% 
Benth. Urochordata 0.01% 0.00% 0.07% 0.00% 
Sponge 0.00% 0.00% 0.01% 0.01% 0.00% 
Bivalves 0.00% 0.04% 0.05% 0.05% 0.00% 0.21% 0.02% 0.24% 
Polychates 0.00% 0.33% 18.58% 4.59% 0.61% 0.21% 4.11% 3.59% 0.14% 0.56% 1.60% 6.33% 
Misc. worm etc. 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 0.22% 0.20% 3.44% 0.01% 0.05% 0.38% 
Scyphozoid jellies 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Fish larvae 0.04% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Chaetognaths etc. 3.23% 1.68% 0.00% 4.84% 0.98% 0.00% 0.25% 0.03% 0.00% 
Euphausiids 12.45% 28.58% 0.16% 32.90% 34.96% 3.31% 2.19% 44.60% 50.03% 5.10% 4.33% 
Mysids 8.95% 2.01% 0.06% 0.22% 9.38% 1.18% 29.68% 2.46% 1.00% 2.38% 17.78% 0.05% 
Pelagic amphipods 0.00% 0.13% 0.00% 0.52% 1.59% 0.02% 0.01% 0.29% 0.52% 0.01% 0.00% 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 11.49% 2.84% 17.28% 0.00% 0.58% 1.45% 0.00% 3.51% 5.52% 0.04% 
Pteropods 0.03% 0.14% 0.00% 0.06% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.16% 0.00% 
Copepods 39.11% 18.86% 5.04% 0.13% 41.92% 36.42% 0.61% 0.01% 26.38% 5.36% 0.00% 0.01% 
Microzooplankton 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Algae 0.00% 0.00% 
Offal 0.89% 5.16% 1.13% 0.00% 7.25% 0.08% 3.19% 
Benth detritus 2.73% 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
250 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
  
   
  
 
Table C13. Herring diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands (AI), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA) 
from diet query (see Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet, blanks are not in diet. 
AI EBS GOA AI EBS GOAHerring Herring Herring Herring Herring   Herring Prey juv juv juv 
Pandalid shrimp 0.00% 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 
Sea star 
Brittle star 
Urchins dollars and 
Snails 
Hermit crabs 
Misc crabs 
Misc. Crustacean 
Benthic amphipods 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Benth. Hydroid 
Benth. Urochordata 
Sponge 
Bivalves 
Polychates 0.04% 0.04% 0.04% 
Misc. worm etc. 
Scyphozoid jellies 
Fish larvae 
Chaetognaths etc. 
Euphausiids 87.86% 95.66% 87.86% 95.66% 87.86% 95.66% 
Mysids 
Pelagic amphipods 0.04% 0.04% 0.04% 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 
Pteropods 
Copepods 12.14% 4.25% 12.14% 4.25% 12.14% 4.25% 
251
 
 
 
         
   
 
 
 
 
  
Table C14. Arrowtooth flounder and halibut diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands (AI), 
and Gulf of Alaska (GOA) from diet query (see Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
AI Arrow. AI Arrow. AI P. AI P. EBS EBS EBS P. EBS P. GOA GOA GOA P. GOA P. 
Prey juv fl. halibut juv halibut Arrow. juv Arrow. fl. halibut juv halibut Arrow. juv Arrow. fl. halibut juv halibut 
W. pollock juv 0.64% 9.94% 0.31% 21.85% 46.91% 1.90% 0.38% 10.11% 0.14% 
W. pollock 1.43% 9.08% 19.48% 52.10% 13.92% 48.26% 
P. cod juv 0.16% 0.00% 0.00% 0.61% 
P. cod   0.68% 0.00% 4.74% 0.01% 1.36% 
Herring juv 6.59% 
Herring   0.18% 1.34% 0.26% 0.79% 0.73% 
Arrowtooth juv 0.34% 0.30% 0.23% 
Arrowtooth fl. 0.00% 0.09% 0.37% 3.46% 
Kamchatka juv 0.14% 0.00% 
P. halibut juv 4.63% 0.00% 0.06% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
P. halibut 0.00% 0.00% 
Yellowfin sole juv 0.00% 0.00% 
Yellowfin sole 0.03% 3.31% 
Flathead sole juv 0.13% 1.13% 0.05% 0.21% 0.05% 
Flathead sole 0.29% 0.02% 1.08% 0.02% 0.43% 
N. rock sole juv 0.00% 0.00% 0.01% 
N. rock sole 0.00% 3.24% 
S. rock sole 0.00% 0.01% 
Alaska plaice 0.49% 
Dover sole 0.30% 
Rex sole 0.10% 0.06% 
Misc. flatfish 2.68% 0.00% 
Alaska skate 0.00% 
Bering skate 0.01% 
Sablefish juv 0.08% 
Sablefish 1.10% 1.69% 0.10% 0.26% 
Eelpouts 0.07% 0.04% 4.29% 0.93% 0.05% 2.22% 0.74% 
Other Macrourids 0.00% 
Misc. deep fish 0.05% 0.05% 0.00% 
Pacific ocean perch 0.21% 
Shortspine thornyhead 0.01% 
Atka mackerel juv 16.40% 0.39% 0.24% 1.11% 
Atka mackerel 3.82% 15.60% 0.04% 0.49% 0.63% 1.58% 
Greenlings 0.04% 
Large sculpins 3.53% 0.05% 0.17% 0.00% 1.06% 0.15% 
Other sculpins 3.20% 4.15% 4.09% 4.80% 2.62% 0.86% 2.24% 0.06% 0.37% 1.92% 0.57% 
Misc. shallow fish 11.81% 3.26% 3.26% 1.82% 0.19% 0.00% 1.55% 0.57% 0.02% 0.22% 
Octopus 0.00% 7.53% 10.70% 0.01% 0.47% 0.00% 0.00% 2.85% 
Squids 0.53% 22.28% 0.88% 0.32% 0.30% 0.23% 
Salmon returning 2.18% 0.32% 
Bathylagidae 0.64% 0.01% 
Myctophidae 4.38% 26.59% 2.08% 0.34% 0.01% 0.01% 0.17% 
Capelin 4.12% 0.61% 0.11% 1.20% 3.86% 23.70% 21.93% 1.83% 
Sand lance 20.01% 2.32% 0.04% 3.44% 7.20% 3.67% 0.09% 2.12% 
Eulachon 2.12% 0.00% 2.10% 0.00% 
Managed forage 3.28% 0.02% 0.42% 0.59% 0.26% 0.13% 2.61% 0.16% 
Oth pel. smelt 0.00% 
Tanner crab* 3.05% 1.27% 0.00% 6.36% 
Tanner crab adu 1.33% 
King crab* 0.32% 0.01% 0.01% 
King crab adu 0.18% 
Snow crab* 0.00% 0.17% 
Snow crab adu 3.23% 
Pandalid shrimp 36.71% 15.55% 20.19% 0.28% 5.43% 3.87% 0.96% 6.54% 9.82% 9.48% 0.64% 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 8.56% 3.01% 7.21% 1.63% 41.88% 2.21% 69.30% 0.46% 2.23% 1.74% 30.38% 0.36% 
Sea star 0.00% 0.00% 
Brittle star 0.00% 0.01% 0.01% 0.00% 0.01% 
Urchins dollars and cucumbers 0.42% 0.00% 0.12% 
Snails 0.05% 0.02% 0.00% 0.24% 0.00% 0.24% 
Hermit crabs 6.72% 3.07% 0.55% 0.02% 0.04% 4.66% 0.00% 31.53% 10.34% 
Misc crabs 0.05% 18.04% 11.47% 0.74% 0.01% 8.41% 12.23% 
Misc. Crustacean 0.03% 0.02% 0.00% 0.02% 0.01% 0.01% 0.04% 
Benthic amphipods 12.21% 2.24% 3.36% 0.20% 0.19% 0.10% 0.00% 0.01% 0.17% 0.05% 15.76% 0.00% 
Benth. Hydroid 0.00% 
Benth. Urochordata 0.75% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Sponge 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Bivalves 1.14% 0.02% 0.37% 0.02% 0.18% 
Polychates 3.09% 0.74% 0.01% 0.02% 0.09% 0.01% 0.01% 0.12% 0.23% 0.14% 
Misc. worm etc. 0.00% 0.19% 0.07% 0.00% 
Scyphozoid jellies 0.00% 
Fish larvae 0.02% 0.01% 
Chaetognaths etc. 0.82% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Euphausiids 9.32% 3.81% 3.54% 24.59% 9.17% 0.34% 59.15% 16.86% 0.17% 0.52% 
Mysids 0.26% 1.65% 2.52% 1.96% 0.10% 30.65% 0.09% 0.01% 0.06% 1.18% 0.00% 
Pelagic amphipods 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 0.01% 0.01% 0.00% 0.00% 
Pteropods 0.02% 0.00% 0.02% 0.00% 
Copepods 0.22% 0.03% 0.03% 0.00% 0.00% 0.01% 
Algae 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Offal 0.64% 5.22% 4.75% 1.74% 0.15% 2.55% 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
252 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Table C15. Greenland turbot and Kamchatka flounder diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS) and Aleutian
 
Islands (AI) from diet query (see Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
EBSAI Kamchatka Ai Kamchatka AI Gr. turbot EBS EBS Gr. EBS Gr. AI Gr. Turbot Kamchatka juv fl. juv Kamchatka fl. turbot juv Turbot Prey juv 
W. pollock juv 8.74% 9.94% 42.28% 58.05% 1.20% 27.15% 
W. pollock 1.43% 2.32% 21.29% 10.53% 
P. cod juv 0.16% 
P. cod 0.12% 
Herring juv 
Herring 0.18% 1.22% 
Arrowtooth juv 0.00% 
P. halibut juv 5.22% 
Flathead sole juv 0.01% 
Flathead sole 0.09% 0.00% 
Sablefish 1.10% 
Eelpouts 5.25% 7.29% 
Other Macrourids 0.00% 
Misc. deep fish 0.05% 4.94% 
Pacific ocean perch 4.00% 
Shortspine thornyhead 0.00% 
Atka mackerel juv 16.40% 
Atka mackerel 3.82% 3.74% 
Other sculpins 7.21% 2.70% 4.15% 0.05% 0.28% 2.17% 
Misc. shallow fish 2.66% 3.26% 0.82% 0.95% 
Octopus 0.00% 0.36% 0.01% 
Squids 0.91% 0.53% 32.67% 0.21% 32.27% 
Salmon returning 
Bathylagidae 5.54% 9.12% 
Myctophidae 4.93% 92.20% 26.59% 49.57% 0.12% 5.18% 
Capelin 4.64% 0.61% 
Managed forage 3.28% 0.77% 2.96% 0.96% 
Oth pel. smelt 
Tanner crab* 0.12% 
Tanner crab adu 0.00% 
King crab* 0.00% 
Snow crab adu 0.00% 
Pandalid shrimp 2.14% 15.55% 2.76% 2.35% 0.25% 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 11.32% 3.01% 40.32% 3.91% 0.37% 0.44% 
Brittle star 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 
Hermit crabs 0.01% 0.22% 
Misc crabs 0.05% 
Misc. Crustacean 0.03% 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 0.00% 
Benthic amphipods 16.74% 2.24% 2.61% 0.72% 0.23% 0.13% 
Benth. Urochordata 
0.75% 
Sponge 0.19% 0.00% 
Bivalves 0.03% 
Polychates 3.48% 0.74% 0.00% 2.86% 0.25% 
Misc. worm etc. 0.08% 
Chaetognaths etc. 9.29% 
Euphausiids 10.04% 3.81% 0.01% 7.84% 3.04% 97.44% 1.92% 
Mysids 2.90% 1.65% 0.68% 0.55% 0.09% 0.00% 0.01% 
Pelagic amphipods 0.75% 0.02% 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 0.01% 0.00% 
Pteropods 5.71% 0.00% 0.00% 
Copepods 4.99% 0.03% 
Offal 0.64% 0.13% 0.30% 0.03% 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
253
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
Table C16. Shallow water flatfish diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands (AI), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA) from d iet query (see 
Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
AI AI AI AI EBS EBS EBS EBS EBS N. EBS GOA GOA GOA GOA AI N. rock AI S. rock AI Alaska EBS N. GOA N. GOA S. Prey Yellowfin Yellowfin Flathead Flathead Yellowfin Yellowfin Flathead Flathead rock sole Alaska Yellowfin Flathead Flathead Alaska sole sole plaice rock sole rock sole rock sole sole juv sole sole juv sole sole juv sole sole juv sole juv plaice sole sole juv sole plaice 
W. pollock juv 6.02% 1.00% 0.05% 16.77% 0.09% 0.37% 0.50%

 
P. cod juv 1.26% 3.22% 0.00% 0.00% 0.01% 0.41%

 
Herring juv 0.18%

 
Arrowtooth juv 0.00% 0.00%

 
Gr. turbot juv 2.67% 0.00% 0.00%

 
P. halibut juv 0.91% 8.35% 0.02% 0.01% 0.01% 0.01%

 
Flathead sole juv 0.00% 0.00% 0.16%

 
N. rock sole juv 0.00% 0.04% 0.00%

 
Alaska plaice 2.13% 0.04% 0.00%

 
Misc. flatfish 0.75% 0.00%

 
Eelpouts 4.90% 3.50% 0.01% 0.35% 0.19% 0.07% 0.00% 0.40% 0.00%

 
Large sculpins 3.89% 0.01%

 
Other sculpins 1.15% 7.34% 7.00% 0.19% 0.82% 0.06% 0.09% 0.00% 0.84% 0.01% 0.33%

 
Misc. shallow fish 2.78% 1.64% 1.80% 0.00% 0.00% 0.51% 0.02%

 
Octopus 0.73% 0.01% 0.02%

 
Squids 0.29% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Bathylagidae 0.00%

 
Myctophidae 0.00%

 
Capelin 0.00% 0.00% 0.10% 0.02%

 
Sand lance 11.40% 4.03% 3.81% 9.63% 6.55% 0. 20% 0.63% 0.35% 14.14% 0.74% 0.65% 1.15% 0.74%

 
Eulachon 0.00% 0.01% 0.01%

 
Managed forage 6.20% 3.97% 0.10% 0.79% 0.06% 0.00% 0.05%

 
Oth pel. smelt

 
Tanner crab* 7.34% 5.27% 0.00% 0.28% 0.00% 0.74% 0.00% 0.05% 2.53% 1.88% 0.01% 0.48% 0.60%

 
King crab* 2.29% 0.01%

 
Snow crab* 0.66% 0.00% 0.96% 0.05% 0.60%

 
Pandalid shrimp 0.00% 0.96% 0.58% 0.00% 0 .02% 6.15% 10.85% 0.16% 0.03% 1.80% 47.08%

 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 3.49% 4.90% 82.45% 7.00% 2.76% 2.32% 6.07% 7. 34% 11.12% 10.15% 1.02% 3.10% 0.01% 5.69% 9.75% 10.42% 1.01% 4.46% 0.01%

 
Sea star 0.00% 3.72% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.05% 0.00%

 
Brittle star 5.85% 2.14% 0.37% 2.48% 1.43% 1.95% 1.02% 3.18% 14.1 6% 24.77% 0.09% 1.26% 0.17% 4.21% 14.94% 18.17% 7.81% 10.42% 0.17%

 
Urchins dollars and cucumbers 12.67% 2.82% 4.77% 10.20% 2.32% 2.20% 4.62% 0.03% 0.61% 2.27% 1.51% 2.19% 10.57% 12.89% 1.51%

 
Snails 3.84% 6.31% 10.06% 1.54% 9.91% 0.67% 1.05% 2.00% 0.02% 0.14% 0.35% 0.11% 0.27% 1.62% 0.02% 0.35%

 
Hermit crabs 1.48% 1.56% 0.25% 7.36% 1.62% 5.33% 0.02% 2.59% 0.00 % 1.60% 0.00% 0.56% 0.01% 10.86% 5.06% 5.23% 1.01% 2.07% 0.01%

 
Misc crabs 3.76% 1.10% 7.94% 1.77% 5.04% 0.07% 0.18% 0.00% 0.12% 0.11% 0.03% 0.30% 0.89% 1.64% 3.58% 0.03%

 
Misc. Crustacean 2.50% 5.67% 100.00% 9.26% 4.68% 3.96% 43.52% 0. 94% 1.23% 0.13% 0.44% 1.22% 0.17% 0.56% 0.27% 1.52% 5.83% 0.17%

 
Benthic amphipods 13.14% 4.54% 5.35% 10.00% 5.66% 20.85% 7.53% 27.43% 2.34% 34.86% 9.57% 9.97% 1.13% 0.02% 0.59% 9.26% 13.59% 9.97%

 
Benth. Hydroid 2.32% 3.05% 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Benth. Urochordata 2.89% 3.47% 3.20% 2.53% 2.83% 0.50 % 0.53% 0.00% 0.13% 0.09% 0.07% 0.05% 0.51% 0.03% 0.05%

 
Sponge 1.76% 0.00% 0.03% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Bivalves 3.06% 1.26% 4.52% 1.90% 11.32% 3.75% 5.33% 11.52% 0.1 8% 2.42% 6.12% 7.31% 15.50% 42.04% 6.98% 4.71% 11.13% 15.50%

 
Polychates 8.18% 1.53% 0.61% 2.77% 1.41% 6.56% 14.23% 25.27% 1.16% 3.88% 53.63% 47.24% 58.41% 32.51% 14.94% 1.33% 56.33% 28.76% 58.41%

 
Misc. worm etc. 4.86% 0.94% 11.22% 2.26% 3.66% 3.81% 0.85% 15.62% 1.01% 0.55% 0.64% 11.00% 12.32% 1.01% 3.02% 2.60% 12.32%

 
Scyphozoid jellies 1.53% 1.74% 0.51% 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Fish larvae 1.64% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Chaetognaths etc. 4.08% 0.01% 0.25% 0.09% 0.00% 7.47% 0.06%

 
Euphausiids 1.50% 0.83% 5.36% 0.00% 14.12% 2.62% 13.83% 15.21% 11.67% 0.53% 1.25% 0.11% 0.31% 25.30% 3.41% 0.09% 0.00% 0.11%

 
Mysids 6.26% 2.99% 0.00% 1.09% 0.49% 19.59% 4. 60% 1.69% 0.13% 0.00% 17.94% 0.83% 0.03% 0.00%

 
Pelagic amphipods 2.16% 2.61% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.04% 0.01% 0.02% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 1.57% 0.00%

 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 0.00% 2.69% 8.03% 0.00% 0.19% 0.00% 0.00% 0.05% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Pteropods 0.00% 2.81% 11.80% 0.00% 0.00% 0.42% 0.58% 0.00% 0.05% 0.00% 0.19% 0.00%

 
Copepods 2.52% 0.98% 0.00% 4.14% 0.00% 0.44% 0.02% 0.39% 0.01% 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 0.04% 0.25% 0.00% 0.01% 0.00%

 
Microzooplankton 2.02% 2.25% 10.33% 0.02% 0.04% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.03% 0.01% 0.01%

 
Algae 0.00%

 
Offal 2.41% 4.62% 5.28% 2.14% 3.87% 5.47% 6.91%

 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
254

 
 
 
 
 
 
       
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Table C17. Deep water and miscellaneous flatfish diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands 
(AI), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA) from diet query (see Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in 
diet. 
Prey AI Dover 
sole AI Rex sole AI Misc. 
flatfish 
EBS Dover 
sole 
EBS Rex 
sole 
EBS Misc. 
flatfish 
GOA Dover 
sole 
GOA Rex 
sole 
GOA Misc. 
flatfish 
W. pollock juv 3.18% 
P. cod juv 0.03% 
Eelpouts 4.20% 
Misc. shallow fish 0.51% 
Octopus 23.16% 0.01% 0.07% 
Capelin 4.55% 
Managed forage 0.82% 
Oth pel. smelt 
Tanner crab* 1.54% 0.63% 0.30% 0.10% 
Snow crab* 0.00% 
Pandalid shrimp 22.24% 9.60% 1.87% 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 6.60% 26.47% 54.55% 10.02% 1.36% 2.51% 
Sea star 0.30% 
Brittle star 5.82% 23.04% 1.03% 6.00% 32.02% 1.10% 6.70% 
Urchins dollars and cucumbers 0.02% 8.94% 
Snails 5.00% 0.04% 0.37% 0.15% 
Hermit crabs 0.11% 0.00% 0.01% 
Misc crabs 2.26% 0.76% 
Misc. Crustacean 31.92% 0.19% 0.47% 0.12% 1.13% 92.80% 
Benthic amphipods 41.29% 7.56% 8.92% 11.80% 6.40% 1.18% 3.17% 0.02% 
Benth. Hydroid 0.00% 
Bivalves 1.05% 0.01% 7.01% 1.48% 0.04% 
Polychates 43.31% 37.05% 9.33% 28.17% 20.45% 24.43% 30.54% 51.80% 0.27% 
Misc. worm etc. 9.57% 31.02% 5.45% 3.31% 2.00% 14.96% 7.21% 
Euphausiids 25.33% 3.52% 9.88% 0.12% 6.53% 27.72% 
Mysids 0.24% 19.52% 0.01% 
Pelagic amphipods 1.18% 0.51% 
Pteropods 0.00% 
Copepods 0.35% 1.68% 
Offal 6.50% 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
255
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
   
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
Table C18. Sablefish, eelpout, all Macrourids (grenadiers), and other deepwater fish diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Ale utian Islands (AI), and 
Gulf of Alaska (GOA) from diet query (see Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
EBS GOAAI Sablefish AI Misc. EBS EBS EBS EBS Misc. GOA GOA GOA GOA Misc. Prey AI Sablefish AI Eelpouts AI Macrourids Sablefish Sablefish juv deep fish Sablefish Eelpouts Macrourids deep fish Sablefish Eelpouts Macrourids deep fish juv juv 
W. pollock juv 0.45% 0.00% 0.00% 0.26% 2.00% 0.00% 
W. pollock 4.85% 0.39% 45.92% 0.39% 18.85% 0.39% 
P. cod juv 0.47%

 
Herring juv 3.56%

 
Herring   0.07% 0.04% 0.07% 0.00% 0.07%

 
Arrowtooth juv 0.02%

 
Flathead sole juv 0.00% 0.00%

 
Flathead sole 0.00%

 
Eelpouts 1.85% 0.03% 1.85% 0.01% 1.85%

 
Shortspine thornyhead 0.01% 0.01%

 
Other Sebastes 0.44%

 
Large sculpins 0.38%

 
Other sculpins 0.00% 1.35% 1.35% 0.75% 1.35%

 
Misc. shallow fish 0.10% 0.01% 0.10% 0.21% 0.10%

 
Octopus 0.11% 3.88% 4.34% 16.18%

 
Squids 3.04% 44.73% 50.00% 10.00% 11.11% 50.00% 50.00% 9.49% 21.20% 3.04% 50.00%

 
Bathylagidae 1.00% 1.79% 2.34%

 
Myctophidae 0.10% 46.88% 0.11% 1.46%

 
Capelin 0.03% 0.03% 0.35% 0.08% 0.03%

 
Sand lance 0.03%

 
Eulachon 0.31%

 
Managed forage 1.21% 30.81% 1.21% 0.00% 1.21%

 
Tanner crab* 0.07% 0.00% 0.84%

 
Snow crab* 9.33%

 
Pandalid shrimp 0.01% 0.14% 4.57% 11.50%

 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 1.66% 1.37% 50.00% 0.52% 1.37% 50.00% 50.00% 0.74% 1.37% 66.94% 50.00%

 
Sea star 0.05% 0.00%

 
Brittle star 0.00% 18.23% 0.03% 18.23% 0.00% 18.23%

 
Urchins dollars and cucumbers 0.00%

 
Snails 0.00% 0.08%

 
Hermit crabs 0.00% 0.25% 0.00% 0.25% 0.03% 1.33% 0.25%

 
Misc crabs 9.89% 0.49% 0.98% 0.63% 9.89%

 
Misc. Crustacean 0.00% 0.54% 0.54% 0.02% 0.01% 0.54%

 
Benthic amphipods 3.48% 32.80% 1.70% 0.02% 32.80% 0.27% 2.42% 32.80%

 
Benth. Hydroid 0.17% 0.17% 0.17%

 
Benth. Urochordata 0.05% 15.00% 16.54% 0.04%

 
Sea pens 0.00%

 
Sponge 0.00%

 
Bivalves 5.26% 5.26% 0.00% 5.26%

 
Polychates 5.30% 23.87% 0.00% 23.87% 0.55% 0.97% 23.87% 0.00%

 
Misc. worm etc. 0.00% 2.37% 2.37% 0.02% 2.37%

 
Scyphozoid jellies 0.29% 1.56% 2.96%

 
Chaetognaths etc. 0.00%

 
Euphausiids 99.90% 20.05% 0.02% 0.18% 50.00% 0.03% 0.02% 46.68% 12.26% 0.02%

 
Mysids 0.52% 0.01% 0.01% 0.12% 0.01%

 
Pelagic amphipods 0.11% 0.01% 0.11% 1.54% 1.14% 0.11%

 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 29.87% 5.50% 12.50%

 
Pteropods 29.69% 10.00% 8.91% 0.02%

 
Copepods 15.00% 14.38% 0.00%

 
Microzooplankton 0.10% 0.00% 0.07% 0.07% 0.07%

 
Algae 0.00%

 
Offal 0.52% 0.06% 3.92% 0.06% 5.24% 0.06%

 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
256

 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Table C19.  Shallow water and pelagic rockfish diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands (AI), and Gulf of Alaska  (GOA) from diet query 
(see Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
EBS GOA GOA AI Pacific AI EBS EBS GOA GOA GOAAI Northern AI Dusky Pacific EBS Dusky Pacific Pacific ocean Sharpchin Sharpchin Northern Sharpchin Northern Dusky rockfish rockfish ocean rockfish ocean ocean perch rockfish rockfish rockfish rockfish rockfish rockfish perch perch juv perch adu Prey 
W. pollock juv 0.01%

 
Arrowtooth juv 0.31% 0.13%

 
Eelpouts 0.00%

 
Other Macrourids 0.01%

 
Misc. deep fish 0.34% 0.57% 0.11%

 
Northern rockfish 0.00% 0.00%

 
Atka mackerel 0.00%

 
Other sculpins 0.19% 0.13%

 
Misc. shallow fish 0.00% 0.03% 0.02%

 
Octopus 0.05% 0.00% 0.25%

 
Squids 0.45% 1.94% 4.97% 0.06% 13.13% 2.78% 0.24% 0.02% 0.00%

 
Bathylagidae 0.00% 0.00% 1.09%

 
Myctophidae 2.54% 1.06% 0.25% 1.54% 0.09% 1.15%

 
Managed forage 0.63%

 
Tanner crab* 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.01% 0.00% 0.01%

 
King crab* 1.00%

 
Pandalid shrimp 10.78% 16.66% 0.78% 0.08% 0.10%

 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 0.07% 6.93% 2.42% 0.05% 6.44% 3.05% 0.53% 3.07% 0.36% 4.13%

 
Brittle star 0.48% 1.43%

 
Snails 0.00% 0.01% 0.02% 0.02% 0.00%

 
Hermit crabs 0.10% 0.02% 0.38% 1.88% 0.04% 0.00% 0.01% 58.84%

 
Misc crabs 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Misc. Crustacean 0.00% 0.03% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Benthic amphipods 0.88% 26.44% 0.40% 100.00% 0.21% 8.45% 0.00% 4.65% 4.44% 23.09% 0.21% 0.97%

 
Polychates 1.57% 1.08% 0.64% 0.04% 1.67% 8.36% 0.00%

 
Misc. worm etc. 0.00%

 
Scyphozoid jellies 0.02% 0.07% 0.00%

 
Chaetognaths etc. 2.24% 2.39% 6.78% 0.23% 1.61% 8.03% 8.36% 3.24% 2.22% 0.12% 15.29%

 
Euphausiids 13.83% 15.18% 24.99% 24.71% 18.76% 4.36% 68.03% 91.21% 75.36% 26.16% 94.59% 8.71%

 
Mysids 0.34% 0.08% 0.02% 63.60% 12.87% 0.29% 0.43% 0.46%

 
Pelagic amphipods 0.13% 4.56% 1.43% 0.00% 0.04% 0.18% 0.34% 0.97%

 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 1.14% 0.02% 0.07% 0.02% 11.28%

 
Pteropods 0.03% 0.20% 0.63% 0.02% 0.08% 0.42% 0.03% 4.44%

 
Copepods 76.34% 27.16% 54.43% 7.86% 19.67% 78.98% 18.96% 0.08% 10.92% 40.94% 4.54% 0.23%

 
Microzooplankton 0.04%

 
Offal 0.37% 1.44% 0.54%

 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
257

 
 
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Table C20.  Deep water and other rockfish diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleu tian Islands (AI), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA) from diet query (see 
Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
GOA GOAAI AI EBS EBS EBS GOA GOAAI Rougheye AI Other EBS Other Shortspine Shortspine GOA Other Shortraker Shortspine Shortraker Rougheye Shortspine Shortraker Rougheye rockfish Sebastes Sebastes thornyhead thornyhead Sebastes rockfish thornyhead rockfish rockfish thornyhead rockfish rockfish Prey juv adu 
W. pollock juv 4.96% 0.01% 14.53%

 
Arrowtooth juv

 
Eelpouts 0.00% 1.76% 0.23%

 
Shortspine thornyhead juv 0.35%

 
Atka mackerel 0.00% 0.00%

 
Other sculpins 0.01% 4.29% 0.65% 0.13% 1.15%

 
Misc. shallow fish 0.17% 0.01% 0.14% 0.02% 0.03% 0.00% 0.00% 0.04%

 
Octopus 0.00% 0.08% 0.53% 1.46%

 
Squids 0.01% 0.08% 0.88% 62.01% 13.13% 4.26% 0.08%

 
Bathylagidae 0.00% 0.17%

 
Myctophidae 0.26% 0.01% 0.28% 0.15% 0.09% 0.62% 0.08%

 
Capelin 0.00%

 
Sand lance 4.63% 1.36%

 
Managed forage 0.14%

 
Tanner crab* 0.00% 0.00% 2.57%

 
King crab* 22.37% 0.00%

 
Pandalid shrimp 0.18% 99.44% 47.92% 83.02% 0.08% 0.19% 16.66% 92.47% 99.99% 33.63% 38.28%

 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 99.47% 0.21% 4.62% 4.94% 13.80% 15.33% 6.44% 2.39% 0.01% 8.09% 32.01% 14.47%

 
Snails 0.03%

 
Hermit crabs 0.38% 0.00% 7.31%

 
Misc crabs 0.05% 0.01% 0.63%

 
Misc. Crustacean 0.00% 0.00% 0.55% 28.13% 0.00% 1.49% 8.23%

 
Benthic amphipods 0.01% 0.02% 14.73% 8.00% 1.43% 36.18% 8.45% 0.00% 0.00% 29.06% 5.51% 0.23%

 
Benth. Urochordata 4.66% 1.04%

 
Bivalves 0.00%

 
Polychates 0.00% 0.03% 0.00% 1.67% 2.37% 2.38%

 
Scyphozoid jellies 13.40% 7.85%

 
Chaetognaths etc. 1.61% 0.00% 0.00% 0.00%

 
Euphausiids 0.00% 0.02% 5.18% 5.34% 2.00% 19.38% 18.76% 0.00% 0.00% 12.50% 0.03% 15.62%

 
Mysids 0.00% 0.00% 0.23% 13.17% 2.61% 48.28% 12.87% 0.07% 0.00% 11.95% 6.01%

 
Pelagic amphipods 0.04% 0.01% 0.00%

 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 0.00% 13.40% 0.03%

 
Pteropods 0.08% 0.14%

 
Copepods 0.00% 12.53% 0.39% 19.67% 0.11% 36.67%

 
Offal 0.04%

 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
258

 
 
 
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Table C21.  Atka mackerel and other greenlings diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands (AI), 
and Gulf of Alaska (GOA) from diet query (see Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
Prey 
AI Atka 
mackerel 
juv 
AI Atka 
mackerel 
AI 
Greenlings 
EBS Atka 
mackerel 
juv 
EBS Atka 
mackerel 
EBS 
Greenlings 
GOA Atka 
mackerel 
juv 
GOA Atka 
mackerel 
GOA 
Greenlings 
W. pollock juv 6.23% 4.73% 4.73% 
Kamchatka juv 0.00% 
P. halibut juv 0.00% 0.01% 
Misc. flatfish 2.97% 2.97% 
Eelpouts 0.20% 
Misc. deep fish 0.00% 
Large sculpins 17.79% 17.79% 
Other sculpins 0.01% 15.01% 0.01% 15.01% 
Misc. shallow fish 0.01% 
Octopus 0.07% 
Squids 10.44% 
Bathylagidae 0.01% 
Myctophidae 0.90% 
Sand lance 0.02% 
Eulachon 0.00% 
Managed forage 0.01% 
Tanner crab* 0.00% 0.63% 
Pandalid shrimp 0.16% 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 0.32% 42.96% 0.00% 42.96% 
Brittle star 0.00% 
Snails 1.08% 29.93% 0.00% 0.32% 0.00% 
Hermit crabs 0.00% 0.10% 
Misc crabs 0.14% 0.44% 0.26% 0.44% 
Misc. Crustacean 0.04% 0.06% 0.00% 0.06% 
Benthic amphipods 4.73% 58.85% 3.25% 0.12% 3.25% 
Benth. Hydroid 0.00% 0.12% 0.12% 
Benth. Urochordata 0.01% 
Sponge 0.00% 0.00% 
Bivalves 0.00% 0.60% 1.19% 0.01% 1.19% 
Polychates 0.58% 2.40% 7.08% 0.01% 7.08% 
Misc. worm etc. 0.01% 8.22% 
Scyphozoid jellies 0.05% 0.03% 
Fish larvae 4.68% 
Chaetognaths etc. 0.71% 
Euphausiids 100.00% 24.26% 90.00% 98.37% 90.00% 84.78% 
Mysids 0.03% 4.33% 4.33% 
Pelagic amphipods 0.35% 0.07% 0.00% 0.07% 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 5.36% 0.37% 2.18% 
Pteropods 0.55% 0.70% 
Copepods 39.01% 10.00% 0.63% 10.00% 11.44% 
Offal 0.07% 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
259
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Table C22.  Sculpins and other miscellaneous fish diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands 
(AI), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA) from diet query (see Appendix B). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
Prey AI Large 
sculpins 
AI Other 
sculpins 
AI Misc. 
shallow 
fish 
EBS 
Large 
sculpins 
EBS 
Other 
sculpins 
EBS Misc. 
shallow 
fish 
GOA 
Large 
sculpins 
GOA 
Other 
sculpins 
GOA 
Misc. 
shallow 
fish 
W. pollock juv 2.43% 9.53% 9.53% 
W. pollock 0.01% 3.45% 3.45% 
P. cod juv 0.00% 4.03% 0.00% 4.03% 
P. cod  0.09% 0.09% 
Herring juv 0.47% 0.47% 
Herring 0.20% 0.20% 
Arrowtooth fl. 0.01% 0.04% 
Kamchatka fl. 0.03% 
P. halibut juv 0.00% 0.00% 
Yellowfin sole juv 2.16% 0.97% 2.61% 
Yellowfin sole 0.45% 
Flathead sole juv 0.02% 0.74% 0.02% 0.97% 
Flathead sole 0.18% 0.18% 
N. rock sole juv 0.74% 0.48% 
N. rock sole 0.23% 
S. rock sole 0.48% 
Alaska plaice 0.12% 0.12% 
Dover sole 0.08% 
Misc. flatfish 0.10% 0.10% 
Eelpouts 3.33% 3.33% 
Misc. deep fish 
Atka mackerel 22.61% 0.00% 0.00% 
Large sculpins 0.18% 0.18% 
Other sculpins 0.39% 2.11% 2.11% 
Misc. shallow fish 10.73% 1.90% 4.99% 1.90% 4.99% 
Octopus 0.66% 0.58% 1.44% 1.44% 
Squids 0.18% 1.08% 0.01% 0.01% 
Myctophidae 0.25% 0.72% 
Capelin 1.23% 1.23% 
Sand lance 0.94% 0.94% 
Eulachon 0.00% 0.00% 
Managed forage 5.76% 5.76% 
Oth pel. smelt 0.03% 0.03% 
Tanner crab* 9.20% 0.47% 3.54% 4.41% 3.54% 
Tanner crab adu 0.07% 
King crab* 0.29% 1.75% 1.75% 
Snow crab* 3.00% 
Snow crab adu 0.86% 
Pandalid shrimp 10.32% 6.57% 0.75% 4.20% 1.87% 0.75% 4.20% 2.57% 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 0.41% 0.77% 3.06% 18.98% 50.14% 20.67% 18.98% 50.14% 3.58% 
Sea star 9.47% 0.61% 0.01% 0.01% 
Brittle star 2.65% 2.59% 0.01% 0.02% 0.01% 0.02% 
Urchins dollars and cucumbers 0.17% 0.00% 0.00% 
Snails 1.15% 0.53% 0.14% 0.14% 
Hermit crabs 1.92% 0.05% 1.92% 
Misc crabs 29.99% 1.95% 1.92% 1.95% 1.92% 
Misc. Crustacean 0.00% 0.67% 0.28% 0.08% 1.44% 0.00% 0.08% 1.44% 
Benthic amphipods 0.03% 26.66% 17.49% 5.96% 19.47% 9.18% 5.96% 19.47% 0.36% 
Benth. Hydroid 0.00% 3.70% 0.00% 3.70% 
Benth. Urochordata 0.01% 
Bivalves 0.04% 0.04% 
Polychates 2.36% 33.40% 0.88% 10.98% 2.55% 0.00% 10.98% 2.55% 
Misc. worm etc. 0.84% 0.24% 1.92% 1.92% 
Scyphozoid jellies 0.14% 0.00% 6.43% 0.00% 0.00% 
Chaetognaths etc. 0.03% 
Euphausiids 1.42% 7.37% 0.11% 0.96% 1.16% 0.96% 
Mysids 11.21% 0.03% 7.60% 0.31% 3.46% 7.60% 0.31% 0.16% 
Pelagic amphipods 0.00% 0.38% 4.57% 0.83% 1.40% 4.57% 0.83% 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 3.73% 70.43% 2.48% 55.00% 2.48% 92.97% 
Pteropods 0.00% 0.00% 
Copepods 0.00% 0.07% 0.07% 0.00% 1.87% 0.03% 0.00% 1.87% 0.28% 
Offal 4.74% 0.80% 0.80% 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
260 
 
 
  
 
 
 
        
 
 
    
Table C23.  Cephalopod, salmon, and forage fish diets in all systems and those specific to the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands (AI), and Gulf 
of Alaska (GOA) from generalized diet query and or literature values (see Appendix A for details). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
All All All All All All Sand All All Oth AI AI EBS EBS/GOA GOA Prey All Squids Salmon Salmon Managed Bathylagidae Capelin lance Eulachon pel. smelt Octopus Myctophidae Octopus Myctophidae Octopus returning outgoing forage 
Squids 20.00%

 
Myctophidae 2.50% 0.47%

 
Capelin 2.50%

 
Sand lance 2.50%

 
Eulachon 2.50%

 
Managed forage 2.50%

 
Oth pel. smelt 2.50%

 
Tanner crab* 5.00%

 
Snow crab* 5.00%

 
Snails 40.00% 40.00%

 
Hermit crabs 40.00% 10.00% 10.00%

 
Misc crabs 20.00% 10.00%

 
Misc. Crustacean 1.72%

 
Benthic amphipods 3.93%

 
Bivalves 40.00% 40.00% 40.00%

 
Chaetognaths etc. 2.50% 20.00% 2.75%

 
Euphausiids 42.00% 20.00% 25.00% 90.00% 90.00% 90.00% 90.00% 90.00% 90.00% 76.55% 90.00%

 
Mysids 2.50% 2.92%

 
Pelagic amphipods 14.00% 25.00% 0.01%

 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 4.00%

 
Pteropods 20.00%

 
Copepods 20.00% 20.00% 50.00% 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 11.64% 10.00%

 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
261

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
       
 
   
 
 
 
 
Table C24.  Commerical shellfish diets in the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS), Aleutian Islands (AI), and Gulf of Alaska (GOA) from generalized diet query 
and or literature values (see Appendix A for details). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
AI EBS EBS EBS EBS EBS EBS GOA GOA All AI King AI Snow GOA King Prey Tanner Tanner Tanner King King Snow Snow Tanner Snow Pandalid crab crab crab crab crab juv crab adu crab juv crab adu crab juv crab adu crab crab shrimp 
Sea star 0.80% 0.82% 0.30% 0.80%

 
Brittle star 3.31% 3.50% 8.03% 20.11% 3.31% 3.56% 3.76% 8.03% 4.00% 3.50% 4.00%

 
Urchins dollars and cucumbers 2.09% 22.20% 0.69% 2.09% 34.79% 11.24% 0.93% 0.69% 2.00% 22.20% 2.00%

 
Snails 3.91% 20.00% 5.90% 3.40% 3.91% 14.99% 21.19% 0.62% 5.90% 3.00% 20.00% 3.00%

 
Hermit crabs 1.53% 2.00% 3.65% 0.99% 1.53% 2.11% 0.46% 3.65% 1.00% 2.00% 1.00%

 
Misc crabs 1.53% 2.00% 3.65% 0.99% 1.53% 2.11% 0.46% 3.65% 1.00% 2.00% 1.00%

 
Misc. Crustacean 0.68% 2.00% 1.93% 0.68% 1.96% 0.92% 1.93% 0.50% 2.00% 0.50%

 
Benthic amphipods 5.40% 2.00% 4.28% 5.40% 2.28% 0.54% 6.77% 4.28% 2.00% 1.20% 2.00% 30.00%

 
Anemones 0.08% 0.23%

 
Corals 0.08%

 
Benth. Hydroid 0.52% 5.00% 0.71% 2.67% 0.52% 2.28% 5.26% 0.30% 0.71% 1.00% 5.00% 1.00%

 
Benth. Urochordata 0.50% 2.28% 0.54% 0.50%

 
Sea pens 0.08%

 
Sponge 0.25% 0.63% 0.30% 0.25%

 
Bivalves 27.03% 20.00% 28.31% 39.65% 27.03% 19.81% 17.99% 13.19% 28.31% 30.00% 18.00% 30.00% 10.00%

 
Polychates 47.95% 15.00% 29.34% 15.46% 47.95% 11.04% 21.19% 25.05% 29.34% 49.00% 15.00% 49.00%

 
Misc. worm etc. 5.00% 2.24% 7.71% 1.07% 3.00% 2.24% 2.00%

 
Euphausiids 0.30% 20.00%

 
Mysids 0.52% 0.52%

 
Benthic bacteria

 
Algae 0.48% 3.23% 0.30% 0.48%

 
Discards 0.89% 0.62% 0.89% 0.41% 0.46% 0.62% 0.80% 0.40% 0.80%

 
Offal 0.89% 0.62% 0.89% 0.41% 0.46% 0.62% 0.70% 0.40% 0.70%

 
Benth detritus 4.28% 8.54% 16.11% 4.28% 4.82% 6.37% 42.43% 8.54% 5.00% 5.00% 5.00% 40.00%

 
262

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
   
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
Table C25.  Benthic invertebrate diets in all systems and those specific to the Eastern Bering Sea (EBS) from from generalized diet query and or 
literature values (see Appendix A for details). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
All All Poly-Urchins All Non- All All All Misc. All All Benth. All Benth. chates dollars All All Misc All Sea All All Benth. All Sea All All EBS Sea Prey Pandalid Brittle Hermit Crusta- Anem- Uro- Amphi- andand Snails crabs star Corals Hydroid pens Sponge Bivalves star shrimp star crabs cean ones chordata pods Misc. cucum- worms bers 
Tanner crab* 1.00% 0.50%

 
Snow crab* 0.50%

 
Pandalid shrimp 0.50% 0.50%

 
Non-Pandalid shrimp 0.50% 0.50%

 
Brittle star 3.00% 3.00%

 
Snails 0.50% 0.50%

 
Hermit crabs 0.50% 0.50%

 
Misc. Crustacean 12.50% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50%

 
Benthic amphipods 30.00% 10.00% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50% 12.50%

 
Bivalves 10.00% 20.00% 25.00% 25.00% 91.00% 91.00%

 
Polychates 20.00% 25.00% 25.00% 2.00% 2.00%

 
Misc. worm etc. 20.00% 25.00% 25.00% 1.00% 1.00%

 
Euphausiids 20.00%

 
Benthic bacteria 50.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 50.00% 50.00%

 
Algae 25.00% 20.00%

 
Benth detritus 40.00% 90.00% 75.00% 20.00% 25.00% 25.00% 50.00% 60.00% 60.00% 60.00% 60.00% 60.00% 60.00% 60.00% 50.00% 50.00%

 
*all ages in AI, GOA models, juveniles in EBS model 
263

 
 
 
  
 
     
 
Table C26.  Plankton and microbial diets all systems from from generalized literature values (see Appendix A). Values of 0.00% are trace in diet. 
Scyphozoid Chaetognaths Pelagic Pel. gel. Micro- Benthic Prey Fish larvae Euphausiids Mysids Pteropods Copepods jellies etc. amphipods filter feeder zooplankton bacteria 
W. pollock juv 0.10%

 
Herring juv 0.10%

 
Squids 0.10%

 
Bathylagidae 0.10%

 
Myctophidae 0.10%

 
Capelin 0.10%

 
Sand lance 0.10%

 
Eulachon 0.10%

 
Managed forage 0.10%

 
Oth pel. smelt 0.10%

 
Fish larvae 5.00%

 
Euphausiids 64.00% 5.00%

 
Mysids 5.00%

 
Pelagic amphipods 5.00%

 
Pel. gel. filter feeder 5.00% 5.00%

 
Pteropods 5.00%

 
Copepods 15.00% 25.00% 25.00% 25.00% 25.00% 25.00% 25.00% 25.00%

 
Microzooplankton 5.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 15.00% 50.00%

 
Large phytoplankton 5.00% 50.00% 25.00% 50.00% 50.00% 50.00% 50.00% 50.00% 25.00%

 
Small phytoplankton 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 10.00% 25.00% 70.00%

 
Pelagic detritus 30.00%

 
Benth detritus 100.00%

 
264

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Table C27.  Data quality ratings (“pedigree”) for EBS model parameters. Ratings scale from 1 (highest data 
quality) to 8 (lowest data quality). See Table 6 in section 2.3 for a detailed explanation of the 
ratings. 
EBS Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
Transient Killers 7 3 6 6 1 2 
Sperm and beaked whale 6 6 6 6 1 2 
Resident Killers 4 3 6 6 1 2 
P o r p o i s e s 3 6 6 6 1 2 
Belugas 4 6 6 6 1 2 
Gray Whales 5 6 6 6 1 2 
H u m p b a c k s 5 2 6 6 1 2 
Fin Whales 4 6 6 6 1 2 
Sei whales 7 6 6 6 1 2 
Right whales 7 6 6 6 1 2 
Minke whales 4 6 6 6 1 2 
Bowhead Whales 5 1 6 6 1 2 
Sea Otters 4 6 6 7 1 2 
Walrus Bd Seals 5 6 6 5 1 2 
N. Fur Seal 4 4 5 5 1 2 
N. Fur Seal_Juv 3 4 7 5 1 2 
Central S.S.L. - - - - - - - -
Central S.S.L._Juv - - - - - - - -
West S.S.L. 2 4 5 5 1 2 
West S.S.L_Juv 2 4 7 5 1 2 
Resident seals 5 6 6 5 1 2 
Wintering seals 5 6 6 5 1 2 
Shearwater 6 6 6 6 4 2 
Murres 4 6 6 6 4 2 
K i t t i w a k e s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
A u k l e t s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Puffins 4 6 6 6 4 2 
F u l m a r s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Storm Petrels 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Cormorants 4 6 6 6 4 2 
G u l l s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Albatross Jaeger 6 6 6 6 4 2 
Sleeper shark 5 7 7 6 3 7 2 
Salmon shark - - - - - - - -
Dogfish - - - - - - - -
W. Pollock 1 3 3 1 1 2 
W. Pollock_Juv 4 4 4 1 1 2 
P .  C o d 2 3 3 1 1 5 2 
P. Cod_Juv 8 4 4 1 1 2 
H e r r i n g 3 3 3 4 1 1 2 
Herring_Juv 8 4 4 5 1 2 
Arrowtooth 2 4 4 1 1 5 2 
Arrowtooth_Juv 8 5 5 1 1 2 
K a m c h a t k a  f l . 3 5 5 2 2 2 
K a m c h a t k a  f l . _ J u v 8 6 6 2 1 2 
G r .  T u r b o t 2 5 5 1 1 2 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 8 6 6 2 1 2 
P .  H a l i b u t 2 5 5 1 2 1 2 
P. Halibut_Juv 8 6 6 1 1 2 
265
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C27 Continued.  
EBS Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
YF. Sole 2 3 3 1 1 2 
YF. Sole_Juv 8 4 4 1 1 2 
F H .  S o l e 2 4 4 1 2 2 
F H .  S o l e _ J u v 8 5 5 1 2 2 
N. Rock sole 2 3 3 1 1 2 
N. Rock sole_Juv 8 4 4 1 1 2 
S. Rock sole - - - - - - - -
AK Plaice 2 6 6 1 1 2 
D o v e r  S o l e 2 6 6 6 1 2 
R e x  S o l e 2 6 6 2 1 2 
Misc. Flatfish 8 6 6 2 2 2 
Alaska skate 2 7 7 1 4 7 2 
B e r i n g  s k a t e 3 7 7 4 4 7 2 
Aleutian skate 3 7 7 4 4 7 2 
Whiteblotched skate 3 7 7 5 4 7 2 
M u d  s k a t e 3 7 7 5 4 7 2 
Longnosed skate 3 7 7 5 4 7 2 
B i g  s k a t e 3 7 7 5 4 7 2 
B l a c k  s k a t e 2 7 7 5 4 7 2 
Sablefish 2 5 5 1 1 5 2 
Sablefish_Juv 8 6 6 6 1 5 2 
Eelpouts 8 7 7 6 7 2 
Giant Grenadier 3 7 7 2 4 2 
Pacific Grenadier 3 7 7 5 4 2 
Other Macruids 3 7 7 5 4 2 
Misc. fish deep 8 7 7 7 7 2 
P O P 3 6 6 1 1 6 2 
POP_Juv - - - - - - - -
Sharpchin Rock 8 6 6 5 2 6 2 
Northern Rock 8 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Dusky Rock 7 6 6 2 1 6 2 
Shortraker Rock 7 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Rougheye Rock 7 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Shortspine Thorns 7 6 6 2 1 6 2 
Shortspine Thorns_Juv - - - - - - - -
Other Sebastes 8 6 6 6 2 6 2 
Atka mackerel 4 5 5 2 1 2 
Atka mackerel_Juv 8 6 6 7 1 2 
Greenlings 8 7 7 2 7 2 
Lg. Sculpins 2 7 7 2 4 6 2 
Other sculpins 8 7 7 2 4 6 2 
Misc. fish shallow 8 7 7 5 7 2 
O c t o p i 8 7 7 7 3 2 
Squids 8 7 7 7 3 2 
S a l m o n  r e t u r n i n g 6 5 5 5 2 1 2 
Salmon outgoing 7 6 6 6 2 2 
B a t h y l a g i d a e 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Myctophidae 8 7 7 7 4 2 
C a p e l i n 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Sandlance 8 7 7 7 4 2 
E u l a c h o n 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Oth. managed forage 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Oth. pelagic smelt 8 7 7 7 4 2 
266
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C27 Continued. 
EBS Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
B a i r d i 2 6 5 5 2 1 2 
Bairdi_Juv 8 6 5 5 2 2 
King Crab 2 6 5 5 2 1 2 
King Crab_Juv 8 6 5 5 2 2 
Opilio 2 6 5 5 2 1 2 
Opilio_Juv 8 6 5 5 2 2 
Pandalidae 8 5 5 7 4 2 
N P  s h r i m p 8 6 6 7 4 2 
S e a  s t a r s 3 6 7 7 4 6 2 
Brittle stars 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Urchins dollars cucumber 8 6 7 7 4 2 
S n a i l s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
H e r m i t  c r a b s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
M i s c .  c r a b s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Misc. Crustacean 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Benthic Amphipods 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Anemones 3 6 7 7 4 2 
C o r a l s 3 6 7 7 4 2 
Hydroids 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Urochordata 3 6 7 7 4 2 
Sea Pens 3 6 7 7 4 2 
Sponges 3 6 7 7 4 2 
B i v a l v e s 7 6 7 7 4 2 
Polychaetes 7 6 7 7 4 2 
Misc. worms 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Scyphozoid Jellies 4 6 6 7 4 2 
Fish Larvae 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Chaetognaths 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Euphausiids 8 5 5 7 1 2 
M y s i d s 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Pelagic Amphipods 8 6 6 7 1 2 
Gelatinous filter feeders 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Pteropods 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Copepods 8 7 5 7 1 2 
Pelagic microbes 7 7 7 7 1 2 
Benthic microbes 8 7 7 1 1 2 
M a c r o a l g a e 8 7 7 0 1 2 
Lg Phytoplankton 8 5 0 0 1 2 
Sm Phytoplankton 8 5 0 0 1 2 
Outside Production 8 7 0 0 1 2 
Discards 8 0 1 2 
Offal 8 0 1 2 
Pelagic Detritus 8 0 1 2 
Benthic Detritus 8 0 1 2 
Outside Detritus 8 0 1 2 
267
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Table C28. Data quality ratings (“pedigree”) for GOA model parameters. Ratings scale from 1 (highest data 
quality) to 8 (lowest data quality). See Table 6 in section 2.3 for a detailed explanation of the 
ratings. 
GOA Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
Transient Killers 7 3 6 6 1 2 
Sperm and beaked whale 6 6 6 6 1 2 
Resident Killers 3 3 6 6 1 2 
P o r p o i s e s 3 6 6 6 1 2 
Belugas - - - - - - - -
Gray Whales 5 6 6 6 1 2 
H u m p b a c k s 4 2 6 6 1 2 
Fin Whales 4 6 6 6 1 2 
Sei whales 7 6 6 6 1 2 
Right whales 7 6 6 6 1 2 
Minke whales 4 6 6 6 1 2 
Bowhead Whales - - - - - - - -
Sea Otters 4 6 6 7 1 2 
Walrus Bd Seals - - - - - - - -
N. Fur Seal 4 4 5 5 1 2 
N. Fur Seal_Juv 4 4 7 5 1 2 
Central S.S.L. 2 4 5 4 1 2 
Central S.S.L._Juv 2 4 7 4 1 2 
West S.S.L. 2 4 5 4 1 2 
West S.S.L_Juv 2 4 7 4 1 2 
Resident seals 5 6 6 5 1 2 
Wintering seals - - - - - - - -
Shearwater 6 6 6 6 4 2 
Murres 4 6 6 6 4 2 
K i t t i w a k e s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
A u k l e t s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Puffins 4 6 6 6 4 2 
F u l m a r s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Storm Petrels 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Cormorants 4 6 6 6 4 2 
G u l l s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Albatross Jaeger 6 6 6 6 4 2 
Sleeper shark 4 7 7 4 3 7 2 
Salmon shark 5 7 7 6 3 5 2 
Dogfish 6 7 7 7 3 5 2 
W. Pollock 1 4 4 1 1 2 
W. Pollock_Juv 8 4 4 1 1 2 
P .  C o d 2 3 3 1 1 5 2 
P. Cod_Juv 8 4 4 1 1 2 
H e r r i n g 3 6 6 5 1 1 2 
Herring_Juv 8 4 4 6 1 2 
Arrowtooth 1 3 3 1 1 5 2 
Arrowtooth_Juv 4 4 4 1 1 2 
K a m c h a t k a  f l . - --- - - - -
K a m c h a t k a  f l . _ J u v - --- - - - -
G r .  T u r b o t - --- - - - -
Gr. Turbot_Juv - - - - - - - -
P .  H a l i b u t 2 3 3 1 2 1 2 
P. Halibut_Juv 4 4 4 1 1 2 
268
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C28. Continued. 
GOA Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
YF. Sole 2 6 6 1 1 2 
YF. Sole_Juv - - - - - - - -
F H .  S o l e 2 3 3 1 1 2 
F H .  S o l e _ J u v 8 4 4 1 1 2 
N. Rock sole 3 6 6 1 2 2 
N. Rock sole_Juv - - - - - - - -
S. Rock sole 3 6 6 1 2 2 
AK Plaice 2 6 6 5 1 2 
D o v e r  S o l e 3 6 6 2 1 2 
R e x  S o l e 3 6 6 2 1 2 
Misc. Flatfish 3 6 6 2 2 2 
Alaska skate 2 7 7 6 4 7 2 
B e r i n g  s k a t e 3 7 7 6 4 7 2 
Aleutian skate 3 7 7 6 4 7 2 
Whiteblotched skate 3 7 7 6 4 7 2 
M u d  s k a t e 2 7 7 6 4 7 2 
Longnosed skate 3 7 7 6 4 7 2 
B i g  s k a t e 3 7 7 6 4 7 2 
B l a c k  s k a t e 2 7 7 6 4 7 2 
Sablefish 3 5 5 4 1 5 2 
Sablefish_Juv 8 6 6 4 1 5 2 
Eelpouts 8 7 7 6 7 2 
Giant Grenadier 3 7 7 2 4 2 
Pacific Grenadier 2 7 7 5 4 2 
Other Macruids 3 7 7 5 4 2 
Misc. fish deep 8 7 7 7 7 2 
P O P 2 3 3 1 1 6 2 
POP_Juv 4 4 4 1 1 6 2 
Sharpchin Rock 8 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Northern Rock 2 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Dusky Rock 3 6 6 2 1 6 2 
Shortraker Rock 3 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Rougheye Rock 3 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Shortspine Thorns 4 3 3 2 1 6 2 
Shortspine Thorns_Juv 8 4 4 2 1 6 2 
Other Sebastes 8 6 6 5 2 6 2 
Atka mackerel 4 5 5 5 1 2 
Atka mackerel_Juv 8 6 6 7 1 2 
Greenlings 2 7 7 6 7 2 
Lg. Sculpins 2 7 7 6 4 6 2 
Other sculpins 8 7 7 6 4 6 2 
Misc. fish shallow 8 7 7 5 7 2 
O c t o p i 8 7 7 7 3 2 
Squids 8 7 7 7 3 2 
S a l m o n  r e t u r n i n g 6 5 5 5 2 1 2 
Salmon outgoing 7 6 6 6 2 2 
B a t h y l a g i d a e 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Myctophidae 8 7 7 7 4 2 
C a p e l i n 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Sandlance 8 7 7 7 4 2 
E u l a c h o n 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Oth. managed forage 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Oth. pelagic smelt 8 7 7 7 4 2 
269
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C28. Continued.  
GOA Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
B a i r d i 8 6 5 7 2 1 2 
Bairdi_Juv - - - - - - - -
King Crab 5 6 5 7 2 1 2 
King Crab_Juv - - - - - - - -
Opilio - - - - - - - -
Opilio_Juv - - - - - - - -
Pandalidae 8 5 5 7 4 2 
N P  s h r i m p 8 6 6 7 4 2 
S e a  s t a r s 4 6 7 7 4 6 2 
Brittle stars 4 6 7 7 4 2 
Urchins dollars cucumber 4 6 7 7 4 2 
S n a i l s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
H e r m i t  c r a b s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
M i s c .  c r a b s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Misc. Crustacean 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Benthic Amphipods 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Anemones 3 6 7 7 4 2 
C o r a l s 2 6 7 7 4 2 
Hydroids 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Urochordata 6 6 7 7 4 2 
Sea Pens 2 6 7 7 4 2 
Sponges 3 6 7 7 4 2 
B i v a l v e s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Polychaetes 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Misc. worms 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Scyphozoid Jellies 5 6 6 7 4 2 
Fish Larvae 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Chaetognaths 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Euphausiids 8 6 6 7 1 2 
M y s i d s 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Pelagic Amphipods 8 6 6 7 1 2 
Gelatinous filter feeders 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Pteropods 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Copepods 8 7 6 7 1 2 
Pelagic microbes 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Benthic microbes 8 7 7 1 1 2 
M a c r o a l g a e 8 7 7 0 1 2 
Lg Phytoplankton 6 5 0 0 1 2 
Sm Phytoplankton 6 5 0 0 1 2 
Outside Production 8 7 0 0 1 2 
Discards 8 0 1 2 
Offal 8 0 1 2 
Pelagic Detritus 8 0 1 2 
Benthic Detritus 8 0 1 2 
Outside Detritus 8 0 1 2 
270
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Table C29. Data quality ratings (“pedigree”) for AI model parameters. Ratings scale from 1 (highest data 
quality) to 8 (lowest data quality). See Table 6 in section 2.3 for a detailed explanation of the 
ratings. 
AI Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
Transient Killers 7 3 6 6 1 2 
Sperm and beaked whale 6 6 6 6 1 2 
Resident Killers 4 3 6 6 1 2 
P o r p o i s e s 4 6 6 6 1 2 
Belugas - - - - - - - -
Gray Whales - - - - - - - -
H u m p b a c k s 4 2 6 6 1 2 
Fin Whales 4 6 6 6 1 2 
Sei whales 7 6 6 6 1 2 
Right whales 7 6 6 6 1 2 
Minke whales 4 6 6 6 1 2 
Bowhead Whales - - - - - - - -
Sea Otters 4 6 6 5 1 2 
Walrus Bd Seals - - - - - - - -
N. Fur Seal - - - - - - - -
N. Fur Seal_Juv - - - - - - - -
Central S.S.L. - - - - - - - -
Central S.S.L._Juv - - - - - - - -
West S.S.L. 2 4 5 4 1 2 
West S.S.L_Juv 2 4 7 4 1 2 
Resident seals 5 6 6 5 1 2 
Wintering seals - - - - - - - -
Shearwater 6 6 6 6 4 2 
Murres 4 6 6 6 4 2 
K i t t i w a k e s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
A u k l e t s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Puffins 4 6 6 6 4 2 
F u l m a r s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Storm Petrels 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Cormorants 4 6 6 6 4 2 
G u l l s 4 6 6 6 4 2 
Albatross Jaeger 6 6 6 6 4 2 
Sleeper shark 5 7 7 6 3 7 2 
Salmon shark 5 7 7 7 3 5 2 
Dogfish 6 7 7 7 3 5 2 
W. Pollock 3 5 5 1 1 2 
W. Pollock_Juv 8 6 6 1 1 2 
P .  C o d 2 5 5 1 1 5 2 
P. Cod_Juv 8 6 6 1 1 2 
H e r r i n g 8 7 7 5 1 1 2 
Herring_Juv 8 6 6 6 1 2 
Arrowtooth 2 5 5 1 1 5 2 
Arrowtooth_Juv 8 6 6 1 1 2 
K a m c h a t k a  f l . 3 5 5 2 2 2 
K a m c h a t k a  f l . _ J u v 8 6 6 6 1 2 
G r .  T u r b o t 2 5 5 1 1 2 
Gr. Turbot_Juv 8 6 6 6 1 2 
P .  H a l i b u t 2 5 5 1 2 1 2 
P. Halibut_Juv 8 6 6 6 1 2 
271
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C29. Continued.  
AI Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
YF. Sole 8 5 5 6 1 2 
YF. Sole_Juv 8 6 6 6 1 2 
F H .  S o l e 2 5 5 1 1 2 
F H .  S o l e _ J u v 8 6 6 1 1 2 
N. Rock sole 3 5 5 6 2 2 
N. Rock sole_Juv - - - - - - - -
S. Rock sole 3 6 6 6 2 2 
AK Plaice 8 6 6 6 1 2 
D o v e r  S o l e 2 6 6 6 1 2 
R e x  S o l e 8 6 6 6 1 2 
Misc. Flatfish 8 6 6 6 2 2 
Alaska skate 2 7 7 2 4 7 2 
B e r i n g  s k a t e 2 7 7 4 4 7 2 
Aleutian skate 2 7 7 4 4 7 2 
Whiteblotched skate 2 7 7 2 4 7 2 
M u d  s k a t e 2 7 7 2 4 7 2 
Longnosed skate 2 7 7 5 4 7 2 
B i g  s k a t e 2 7 7 5 4 7 2 
B l a c k  s k a t e 2 7 7 5 4 7 2 
Sablefish 3 5 5 4 1 5 2 
Sablefish_Juv 8 6 6 6 1 5 2 
Eelpouts 8 7 7 6 7 2 
Giant Grenadier 6 7 7 3 4 2 
Pacific Grenadier 6 7 7 5 4 2 
Other Macruids 8 7 7 5 4 2 
Misc. fish deep 8 7 7 7 7 2 
P O P 2 3 3 1 1 6 2 
POP_Juv - - - - - - - 2 
Sharpchin Rock 8 6 6 5 2 6 2 
Northern Rock 2 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Dusky Rock 2 6 6 2 1 6 2 
Shortraker Rock 2 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Rougheye Rock 2 6 6 2 2 6 2 
Shortspine Thorns 2 6 6 2 1 6 2 
Shortspine Thorns_Juv - - - - - - - -
Other Sebastes 8 6 6 6 2 6 2 
Atka mackerel 1 3 3 1 1 2 
Atka mackerel_Juv 8 4 4 2 1 2 
Greenlings 8 7 7 2 7 2 
Lg. Sculpins 8 7 7 2 4 6 2 
Other sculpins 8 7 7 2 4 6 2 
Misc. fish shallow 8 7 7 5 7 2 
O c t o p i 8 7 7 7 3 2 
Squids 8 7 7 7 3 2 
S a l m o n  r e t u r n i n g 6 5 5 5 2 1 2 
Salmon outgoing 7 6 6 6 2 2 
B a t h y l a g i d a e 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Myctophidae 8 7 7 5 4 2 
C a p e l i n 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Sandlance 8 7 7 7 4 2 
E u l a c h o n 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Oth. managed forage 8 7 7 7 4 2 
Oth. pelagic smelt 8 7 7 7 4 2 
272
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table C29. Continued.  
AI Group Biomass P/B Q/B Diet Catch: Fed Halibut State Subsistence 
B a i r d i 8 6 5 7 2 1 2 
Bairdi_Juv - - - - - - - -
King Crab 7 6 5 7 2 1 2 
King Crab_Juv - - - - - - - -
Opilio - - - - - - - -
Opilio_Juv - - - - - - - -
Pandalidae 8 5 5 7 4 2 
N P  s h r i m p 8 6 6 7 4 2 
S e a  s t a r s 8 6 7 7 4 6 2 
Brittle stars 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Urchins dollars cucumber 8 6 7 7 4 2 
S n a i l s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
H e r m i t  c r a b s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
M i s c .  c r a b s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Misc. Crustacean 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Benthic Amphipods 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Anemones 5 6 7 7 4 2 
C o r a l s 5 6 7 7 4 2 
Hydroids 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Urochordata 6 6 7 7 4 2 
Sea Pens 5 6 7 7 4 2 
Sponges 6 6 7 7 4 2 
B i v a l v e s 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Polychaetes 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Misc. worms 8 6 7 7 4 2 
Scyphozoid Jellies 7 6 6 7 4 2 
Fish Larvae 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Chaetognaths 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Euphausiids 8 6 6 7 1 2 
M y s i d s 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Pelagic Amphipods 8 6 6 7 1 2 
Gelatinous filter feeders 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Pteropods 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Copepods 8 7 6 7 1 2 
Pelagic microbes 8 7 7 7 1 2 
Benthic microbes 8 7 7 1 1 2 
M a c r o a l g a e 8 7 7 0 1 2 
Lg Phytoplankton 8 6 0 0 1 2 
Sm Phytoplankton 8 6 0 0 1 2 
Outside Production 8 7 0 0 1 2 
Discards 8 0 1 2 
Offal 8 0 1 2 
Pelagic Detritus 8 0 1 2 
Benthic Detritus 8 0 1 2 
Outside Detritus 8 0 1 2 
273
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9. Citations 
Abookire, A. A., and B. J. Macewicz. 2003. Latitudinal variation in reproductive biology and growth of 
female Dover sole (Microstomus pacificus) in the North Pacific, with emphasis on the Gulf of 
Alaska stock. J. Sea Res. 50: 187-197. 
ADF&G [Alaska Department of Fish and Game]. 1994. Tanner crabs, Wildlife notebook series, Text: 
Commercial Fisheries Management and Development Staff; Illustration: Susan R. Kilka. 
Available at http://www.adfg.state.ak.us/pubs/notebook/shellfsh/tanner.php. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Ainley, D. G., C. S. Strong, T. M. Penniman, and R. J. Boekelheide. 1990. The feeding ecology of 
Farallon birds, p. 51–127. In D. G. Ainley, and R. J. Boekelheide (eds.), Seabirds of the Farallon 
Islands. Stanford Univ. Press, Stanford, CA. 
Allen, K. R. 1971. Relation between production and biomass. J. Fish. Res. Bd. Can. 28: 1573-1581.  
Anderson, P. J. 2000. Pandalid shrimp as indicators of marine ecological regime shift. J. Northw. Atl. 
Fish. Sci. 27:1-10. 
Anderson, P. J., and J. F. Piatt. 1999. Community reorganization in the Gulf of Alaska following ocean 
climate regime shift. Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 189:117-123. 
Anderson, D. R., and K. P. Burnham. 2002. Model selection and multi-model inference: a practical 
information-theoretic approach. 2nd Ed. Springer, New York. 488 p.  
Anderson, S. A., and K. J. Goldman. 2001. Temperature measurements from salmon sharks, Lamna 
ditropis, in Alaskan waters. Copeia 2001(3):794-796. 
Andrews, A. H., G. M. Cailliet, and K. H. Coale. 1999. Age and growth of Pacific grenadier 
(Coryphaenoides acrolepis) with age estimate validation using an improved radiometric ageing 
technique. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 1339-1350. 
Andrews, A. H., E. Cordes, and M. M. Mahoney. 2002. Age and growth and radiometric age validation of 
a deep-sea, habitat-forming gorgonian (Primnoa resedaeformis) from the Gulf of Alaska, p. 101­
110. In L. Watling, and M. Risk (eds.), Biology of cold water corals. Hydrobiologia 471. 
Angliss, R. P., and K. L. Lodge. 2002. Alaska marine mammal stock assessments, 2002. U.S. Dep. 
Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-AFSC-133, 224 p. 
Angliss, R. P., and K. L. Lodge. 2004. Alaska marine mammal stock assessments, 2003. U.S. Dep. 
Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-AFSC-144, 230 p. 
Angliss, R. P., and R. B. Outlaw. 2005. Alaska marine mammal stock assessments, 2005. U.S. Dep. 
Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-AFSC-161, 250 p. 
Arai, M. N. 1997. A Functional Biology of Scyphozoa. Chapman & Hall, London. 316 p. 
Arkhipkin, A. I., V. A. Bizikov, V. V. Krylov, and K. N. Nesis. 1996. Distribution, stock structure, and 
growth of the squid Berryteuthis magister (Berry, 1913) (Cephalopoda, Gonatidae) during 
summer and fall in the western Bering Sea. Fish. Bull. 94: 1-30.  
Asmus, H. 1987. Secondary production of an intertidal mussel bed community related to its storage and 
turnover compartments. Mar. Biol. 39: 251-266. 
Aydin, K. Y. 2000. Trophic feedback and carrying capacity of Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) on the 
high seas of the Gulf of Alaska. Ph.D. diss., University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 
275
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Aydin, K. Y. 2004. Age structure or functional response? Reconciling the energetics of surplus 
production between single-species models and ECOSIM. Afr. J. Mar. Sci. 26: 289-301.  
Aydin, K. Y., V.V Lapko, V. I. Radchenko, and P. A. Livingston. 2002. A comparison of the eastern and 
western Bering Sea shelf and slope ecosystems through the use of mass-balance food web 
models. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-AFSC-130, 78 p. 
Aydin, K. Y., G. A. McFarlane, J. R. King, and B. A. Megrey (eds.). 2003. The BASS/MODEL report on 
trophic models of the subarctic Pacific basin ecosystems. North Pacific Marine Science 
Organization (PICES) Scientific Report 25. 
Bailey, E. P. 1993. Fox introductions on Alaskan islands: History, impacts on avifauna, and eradication. 
U.S. Fish Wildl. Serv. Res. Publ. 193. 54 p. 
Bailey, K. M. 2000. Shifting control of recruitment of walleye pollock Theragra chalcogramma after a 
major climatic and ecosystem change. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 198: 215-224. 
Bailey, K. M., R. D. Brodeur, N. Merati, and M. M. Yoklavich.1993. Predation on walleye pollock 
(Theragra chalcogramma ) eggs and yolk-sac larvae by pelagic crustacean invertebrates in the 
western Gulf of Alaska. Fish. Oceanogr. 2: 30-39. 
Banse, K., and S. Mosher. 1980. Adult body mass and annual production/biomass relationship of field 
populations. Ecol. Monogr. 50(3): 355-379. 
Barbeaux, S., J. Ianelli, and E. Brown. 2003. Aleutian Islands walleye pollock SAFE. In: Stock 
assessment and fishery evaluation report for the groundfish resources of the Bering Sea/Aleutian 
Islands region, November 2003, p. 839-888. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 
4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/AIpollock.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Barlow, J., and P. Boveng. 1991. Modelling age mortality for marine mammal populations. Mar. Mamm. 
Sci. 7(1): 50-65.  
Barnes, R. D. 1980. Invertebrate zoology. Saunders College, Philadelphia. 1,089 p. 
Beaulieu, S. E. 2001. Life on glass houses: sponge stalk communities in the deep sea. Mar. Biol. 138:803­
817. 
Bell, F. H. 1981. The Pacific halibut: the resource and its fishery. Anchorage: Alaska Northwest 
Publishing Company. 267 p. 
Bockstoce, J. 1978. History of commercial whaling in Arctic Alaska. Alaska Geogr. 5(4): 17-25. 
Boersma, P. D., and M. C. Silva. 2001. Fork-tailed storm-petrel (Oceanodroma furcata). In A. Poole, and 
R. Gill (eds.), The Birds of North America: No. 569. The Academy of Natural Sciences, 
Philadelphia, PA, and the American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Boyle, P. R. 1983. Commentary, p. 411-122.  In P.R. Boyle (ed.), Cephalopod life cycles Vol.1: Species 
Accounts. Academic Press, London. 
Brodeur, R. D., and M. Terazaki. 1999. Springtime abundance of chaetognaths in the shelf region of the 
northern Gulf of Alaska, with observations on the vertical distribution and feeding of Sagitta 
elegans. Fish. Oceanogr. 8(2):93-103. 
Brodeur, R. D., H. Sugisaki, and G. L. Hunt. 2002. Increases in jellyfish biomass in the Bering Sea: 
Implications for the ecosystem. Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 233:89-103.  
Browning, R. 1980. Fisheries of the North Pacific, History, Species, Gear and Processes. Anchorage: 
Alaska Northwest Publishing Company. 423 p. 
276
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Buckley, T. W., and P. A. Livingston. 1994. A bioenergetics model of walleye pollock (Theragra 
chalcogramma) in the Eastern Bering Sea: Structure and documentation. U.S. Dep. Commer., 
NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-AFSC-37, 55 p. 
Buckland, S. T., K. L. Cattanach, and R. C. Hobbs. 1993. Abundance estimates of Pacific white-sided 
dolphin, northern right whale dolphin, Dall’s porpoise and northern fur seal in the North Pacific, 
1987/90, p. 387-407. In W. Shaw, R. L. Burgner, and J. Ito (eds.), Biology, Distribution and 
Stock Assessment of Species Caught in the High Seas Driftnet Fisheries in the North Pacific 
Ocean. Intl. North Pac. Fish. Comm. Symposium; 4-6 November 1991, Tokyo, Japan. 
Burton, E. J. 1999. Radiometric age determination of the giant grenadier (Albatrossia pectoralis) using 
210Pb:226Ra disequilibria. Master’s thesis, San Francisco State University, San Francisco, CA, 
91 p. 
Byrd, G. V., and J. C. Williams. 1993. Whiskered auklet (Aethia pygmaea). In A. Poole, and R. Gill 
(eds.). The Birds of North America: 76. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and 
the American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Calambokidis J., G. H. Steiger, J. M. Straley, T. J. Quinn II, L. M. Herman, S. Cerchio, D. R. Salden, M 
Yamaguchi, F. Sato, J. Urban R., J. Jacobsen, O. von Ziegesar, K. C. Balcomb, C. M. Gabriele, 
M. E. Dahlheim, N. Higashi, S. Uchida, J. K. B. Ford, Y. Miyamura, P. Ladron de Guevara P., S. 
A. Mizroch, L. Schlender, and K. Rasmussen. 1997. Abundance and population structure of 
humpback whales in the North Pacific basin. Final contract report 50ABNF500113 to Southwest 
Fisheries Science Center, P.O. Box 271, La Jolla, CA 92038. 72 p. 
Cairns, D. K., and D. C. Schneider. 1990. Hot spots in cold water: Feeding habitat selection by thick-
billed murres. Stud. Avian Biol. 14:52-60. 
Caswell, H., S. Brault, A. J. Read, and T. D. Smith. 1998. Harbor porpoise and fisheries: An uncertainty 
analysis of incidental mortality. Ecol. Appl. 8: 1226-1238. 
Christensen, V., and D. Pauly. 1992. Ecopath II - a software for balancing steady-state ecosystem models 
and calculating network characteristics. Ecol. Modell. 61: 169-185. 
Christensen, V., and C. Walters. 2004. Ecopath with Ecosim: methods, capabilities, and limitations. Ecol. 
Modell. 172: 109-139. 
Christensen, V, C. J. Walters, and D. Pauly. 2000. Ecopath with Ecosim: a Users Guide, October 2000 
Edition. Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada and ICLARM, 
Penang, Malaysia. 130 p.  
Ciannelli, L., B. W. Robson, R. C. Francis, , K. Aydin, and R. D. Brodeur. 2004. Boundaries of open 
marine ecosystems: an application to the Pribilof Archipelago, southeast Bering Sea. Ecol. Appl. 
14:942-953 
Clark, W. G., and S. R. Hare, 2003. Assessment of the Pacific halibut stock at the end of 2003. 
International Pacific Halibut Commission, 
P.O. Box 95009, Seattle, WA 98145-2009. 
Available at http://www.iphc.washington.edu/halcom/research/sa/papers/sa03.pdf. Accessed 
11/9/2007. 
Clark, W. G., S. R. Hare, A. M. Parma, P. J. Sullivan, and R. J. Trumble. 1999. Decadal changes in 
growth and recruitment of Pacific halibut (Hippoglossus stenolepis). Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 56: 
242-252.  
277
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
Clausen, D. M. 2006a. Grenadiers in the Gulf of Alaska, Eastern Bering Sea, and Aleutian Islands, p. 
564-600. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the 
Bering Sea, Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska, November 2006, Appendix F. North Pacific 
Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available 
at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/grenadiers.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Clausen, D. M. 2006b. Gulf of Alaska Shortraker Rockfish and Other Slope Rockfish (Executive 
Summary), p. 391-394. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish 
Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2006, Section 11. North Pacific Fishery Management 
Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/GOAshortraker_orock.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Clausen, D. M., J. T. Fujioka, and J. Heifetz. 2003a. Shortraker/rougheye and Other Slope Rockfish, p. 
531-572.  In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of 
the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 9. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 
W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at
 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAsrre.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Clausen, D. M., C. R. Lunsford, D. H. Hanselman, and J. T. Fujioka. 2003b. Pelagic Shelf Rockfish, p. 
573-598. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the 
Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 10. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 
4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOApsrock.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Compagno, L. J. V. 1984. FAO species catalogue. Vol. 4. Sharks of the World. An Annotated and 
Illustrated Catalogue of Shark Species Known to Date. Part 1. Hexanchiformes to Lamniformes. 
FAO Fisheries Synopsis, (125)4, Pt.1, 249 p. 
Cooney, R.T. 1981. Bering Sea zooplankton and micronekton communities with emphasis on annual 
production, p. 947-974. In Hood, D.W. and J.A. Calder (eds.) The eastern Bering Sea shelf: 
Oceanography and Resources, Vol. II. Univ. Wash. Press, Seattle WA. 1,339 p. 
Cooney, R.T., 1986. The seasonal occurrence of Neocalanus cristatus, Neocalanus plumchrus, and 
Eucalanus bungii over the shelf of the Northern Gulf of Alaska. Cont. Shelf Res. 5(5):541-553. 
Courtney, D., D. M. Clausen, J. Heifetz, D. H. Hanselman, J. T. Fujioka, and J. Ianelli. 2003. Gulf of 
Alaska Northern Rockfish, p. 481-530. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for 
the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 8. North Pacific 
Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available 
at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAnorthernrf.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Courtney, D., J. Ianelli, D. H. Hanselman, and J. Heifetz. 2006. Gulf of Alaska Northern Rockfish, p. 
321-382.  In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of 
the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 9, p. 321-382. North Pacific Fishery Management 
Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/GOANortherns.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Crawford, T. W. 1981. Vertebrate prey of Phocoenoides dalli, (Dall's porpoise), associated with the 
Japanese high seas salmon fishery in the North Pacific Ocean. Unpublished M.S. thesis, 
University of Washington, Seattle WA. 
Cury, P. M., L. J. Shannon, J-P. Roux, G. M. Daskalov, A. Jarre, C. L. Moloney, and D. Pauly, 2005. 
Trophodynamic indicators for an ecosystem approach to fisheries. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 62: 430-442. 
Dagg, M. J., J. Vidal, T. E. Whitledge, R. L. Iverson, and J. J. Goering. 1982. The feeding, respiration, 
and excretion of zooplankton in the Bering Sea during a spring bloom. Deep-Sea Res. 29:45-63. 
278
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
Dahlheim, M. E. 1997. A photographic catalog of killer whales, Orcinus orca, from the central Gulf of 
Alaska to the Southeastern Bering Sea. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA Technical Report NMFS 
131, 54 p. 
Dahlheim, M. E., and J. E. Heyning. 1999. Killer whale Orcinus orca (Linnaeus, 1758), p. 281-322. In S. 
H. Ridgway and R. Harrison, (eds.), Handbook of Marine Mammals, Volume 6: Second book of 
dolphins and the porpoises. Academic Press, San Diego, CA. 
Davis, N. D. 2003. Feeding ecology of Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus spp.) in the central North Pacific 
Ocean and central Bering Sea, 1991-2000. Ph.D. Diss., Hokkaido University, Hakodate, Japan. 
Dorn, M., S. Barbeaux, M. Guttormsen, B. Megrey, A. Hollowed, M. Wilkins, and K. Spalinger, 2003. 
Assessment of walleye pollock in the Gulf of Alaska, p. 33-148. In Stock Assessment and Fishery 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 
1. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 
99501. Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOApollock.pdf. Accessed 
11/9/2007. 
Doroff, A. M., J. A. Estes, M. T. Tinker, D. M. Burn, and T. J. Evans. 2003. Sea otter population declines 
in the Aleutian Archipelago. J. Mammal. 84:55-64. 
Dulepov, V. I. 1995. Productive processes in population of water animals. Vladivostok. Dalnauka. 246 p. 
(in Russian). 
EPAP [Ecosystem Principles Advisory Panel]. 1999. Ecosystem-based Fishery Management. A Report to 
[US] Congress by the National Marine Fisheries Service Ecosystem Advisory Panel, 54 p. 
Eschmeyer, W. N., E. S. Herald, and H. Hammann, 1983. A field guide to Pacific coast fishes of North 
America. Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston. 336 p. 
Essington, T. E., J. F. Kitchell, and C. J. Walters, 2001. The von Bertalanffy growth function, 
bioenergetics, and the consumption rates of fish. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 58: 2129-2138. 
Estes, J. A., Jameson R. J. and Johnson A. M. 1981. Food selection and some foraging tactics of sea 
otters, p. 606-641. In J. A. Chapman, and D. Pursley (eds.), The worldwide furbearer conference 
proceedings Worldwide Furbearers Conference Inc. Frostburg, MD.  
Evans, S. 1984. Energy budgets and predation impact of dominant epibenthic carnivores on a shallow soft 
bottom community at the Swedish west coast. Estuar. Coast. Shelf Sci. 18:651-672. 
Fay, G. 2004. A Bayesian stochastic metapopulation model for Steller sea lions in Alaska. Masters thesis. 
School of Aquatic and Fishery Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA. 253 p. 
Feder, H. 1978. Survey of the epifaunal invertebrates of the southeastern Bering Sea, p. 1-126. In 
Environmental Assessment of the Alaskan Continental Shelf, Annual Reports vol. 4. U.S. Dep. 
Commer., Natl. Oceanic Atmos. Admin., Environ. Res. Lab. Boulder, CO. 
Feder, H. M., and S. C. Jewett, 1981. Feeding interactions in the eastern Bering Sea with emphasis on the 
benthos, p. 1,229-1,261. In D. W. Hood, and J. A. Calder (eds.), The eastern Bering Sea shelf: 
oceanography and resources, vol. 2. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA, Office of Marine Pollution 
Assessment, Univ. Washington Press, Seattle, WA. 
Feder, H. M., K. Haflinger, M. Hoberg, and J. McDonald. 1981. The infaunal invertebrates of the 
southeastern Bering Sea. Environmental Assessment of the Alaskan Continental Shelf, Final 
Reports 9: 257-670. U.S. Dep. Commer. NOAA, Office of Marine Pollution Assessment. 
279
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Feder, H. M. and S. C. Jewett. 1986. Subtidal Benthos, p. 347-396. In D. W. Hood, and S. T. Zimmerman 
(eds.), The Gulf of Alaska, Physical Environment and Biological Resources. U. S. Dep. 
Commer., NOAA, National Ocean Service, 655 p. 
Fiscus, C. H. 1997. Cephalopod beaks in Cuvier's beaked whale (Ziphius cavirostris) from Amchitka 
Island, Alaska. Mar. Mamm. Sci. 13(3): 481-486. 
Fiscus, C. H., and L. L. Jones. 1999. A note on cephalopods from the stomachs of Dall's porpoises 
(Phocoenoides dalli) from the Northwestern Pacific and Bering Sea, 1978-1982. J. Cetacean Res. 
Manage. 1(1): 101-107. 
Francis, R. C., S. R. Hare, A. B. Hollowed, and W. S. Wooster. 1998. Effects of interdecadal climate 
variability on the oceanic ecosystems of the NE Pacific. Fish. Oceanogr. 7: 1-21. 
Fredin, R. A. 1985. Fishing efforts by net fisheries in the North Pacific Ocean and Bering Sea since the 
1950's. NWAFC Processed Rep. 85-02, 42 p. Alaska Fish. Sci. Cent., NOAA, Natl. Mar. Fish. 
Serv., 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle WA 98115. 
Frisk, M. G., T. J. Miller, and M. J. Fogarty, 2001. Estimation and analysis of biological parameters in 
elasmobranch fishes: a comparative life history study. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 58: 969-981. 
Fritz, L. W. 1996. Squid and other species. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the 
Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands. North Pacific Fishery Management 
Council, 605 W. 4
th Ave., Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. 
Frost, K. J., R. B. Russell, and L. R. Lowry. 1992. Killer whales, Orcinus orca, in the Southeastern 
Bering Sea: Recent sighting and predation on other marine mammals. Mar. Mamm. Sci. 8(2): 
110-119. 
Furness, R.W. 1987. Seabird ecology. Chapman, NY.  
Gaichas, S. 2003. Squid and other species in the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, p. 777-808. In Stock 
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and 
Aleutian Islands region, November 2003, Section 13. North Pacific Fishery Management 
Council, 605 W. 4th Ave., Suite 306, Anchorage AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/BSAIosps.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Gaichas, S., and J. Ianelli. 2003. Assessment of Thornyheads (Sebastolobus spp.) in the Gulf of Alaska, p. 
659-698.  In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of 
the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section12. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 
W. 4th Ave., Suite 306, Anchorage AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAthornyheads.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Gaichas, S., and J. Ianelli. 2005. Gulf of Alaska Thornyheads, p. 825-860. In Stock Assessment and 
Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2005, 
Section 14. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Ave., Suite 306, Anchorage 
AK 99501. Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOAThornyheads.pdf. 
Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Gaichas S., L. Fritz, and J. Ianelli. 1999. Other species considerations for the Gulf of Alaska, Appendices 
D and E. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the 
Gulf of Alaska, November 1999. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th 
Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/historic_assess/othspp99.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
280
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
Gaichas, S., A. Greig, and A. Hollowed. 2006. Gulf of Alaska Squids. Draft assessment prepared at the 
request of the North Pacific Fishery Management Council and presented to the Scientific and 
Statistical Committee, February 7, 2006. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th 
Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. 
Gaichas, S., M. Ruccio, D. Stevenson, and R. Swanson. 2003. Stock assessment and fishery evaluation of 
skate species (Rajidae) in the Gulf of Alaska, p. 719-756. In Stock Assessment and Fishery 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 
13. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 
99501. Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAskate.pdf. Accessed 
11/9/2007. 
Gaichas, S., D. Courtney, T. TenBrink, M. Nelson, S. Lowe, J. Hoff, B. Matta, and J. Boldt. 2004. Bering 
Sea Aleutian Islands Squid and Other species stock assessment. In: Stock Assessment and Fishery 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2004, Section 16, p. 927-1008. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W 4th 
Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2004/BSAIosps.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Gaston, A. J., and J. M. Hipfner. 2000. Thick-billed murre (Uria lomvia). In Poole A., and R. Gill (eds.), 
The Birds of North America: No. 497. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and 
the American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Gearin, P. J., S. R. Melin, R. L. DeLong, H. Kajimura, and M. A. Johnson. 1994. Harbor porpoise 
interactions with a Chinook salmon set-net fishery in Washington State. Report of the 
International Whaling Commission (Special Issue 15):427-438. 
Gharrett, A. J., A. P. Matala, E. L. Peterson, A. K. Gray, Z. Li, and J. Heifetz. 2005. Two genetically 
distinct forms of rougheye rockfish are different species. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 132:242-260. 
Gilmore, R.G. 1993. Reproductive biology of lamnoid sharks. Environ. Biol. Fish. 38:95-114. 
Givens, G. H., A. E. Raftery, and J. E. Zeh. 1993. Benefits of a Bayesian approach for synthesizing 
multiple sources of evidence and uncertainty linked by a deterministic model. Rep. Int. Whal. 
Comm. 43: 495-500. 
Goldman, K. J., and J. A. Musick. 2006. Growth and maturity of salmon sharks (Lamna ditropis) in the 
eastern and western North Pacific, and comments on back-calculation methods. Fish. Bull., U.S. 
104:278–292.  
Gregg, J. L., D. M. Anderl, and D. K. Kimura. 2006. Improving the precision of otolith-based age 
estimates for Greenland halibut (Reinhardtius hippoglossoides) with preparation methods adapted 
for fragile sagittae. Fish. Bull., U.S. 104:643-648 (2006). 
Gusey, W. F. 1978. Fishery resources in the Gulf of Alaska, Chapter 6, pp 327-567. In The fish and 
wildlife resources of the Gulf of Alaska. Houston: Shell Oil Company, 580 p. 
Hanselman, D., J. Heifetz, J.T. Fujioka, and J.N. Ianelli 2003. Gulf of Alaska Pacific ocean perch, p. 429­
480. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the 
Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 7. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 
4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAPOP.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
281
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Hanselman, D., J. Heifetz, J.T. Fujioka, and J.N. Ianelli. 2005. Gulf of Alaska Pacific ocean perch, p. 
526-578. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the 
Gulf of Alaska, November 2005, Section 8. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 
4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOAPOP.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Hanselman, D. H., C. R. Lunsford, M. Sigler, and J. T. Fujioka, 2005. Alaska sablefish assessment for 
2006, p. 245-315. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish 
Resources of the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands and Gulf of Alaska regions, November 2005, 
Section 3. North Pacific Fisheries Management Council, 605 W. 4th Ave., Suite 306, Anchorage 
AK 99501. Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOAsable.pdf. Accessed 
11/9/2007. 
Hanselman D. H., C. R. Lunsford, J. T. Fujioka, and C. J. Rodgveller. 2006. Alaska sablefish assessment 
for 2007, p. 341-428. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish 
Resources of the Bering Sea/Aleutian Islands and Gulf of Alaska regions, November 2006, 
Section 3. North Pacific Fisheries Management Council, 605 W. 4th Ave., Suite 306, Anchorage 
AK 99501. Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/sablefish.pdf. Accessed 
11/9/2007. 
Hart, J. L., 1980. Pacific fishes of Canada. Fisheries Research Board of Canada, Bulletin 180. 740 p. 
Hartwick, B., 1983. Octopus dofleini, p. 277-291. In P.R. Boyle (ed.), Cephalopod life cycles Vol.1: 
Species Accounts. Academic Press, London. 
Hatch S. A., and D. N. Nettleship. 1998. Northern fulmar (Fulmarus glacialis). In Poole A, Gill F (eds.), 
The Birds of North America: 361. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and the 
American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Heifetz, J. 2000. Coral in Alaska: Distribution, abundance, and species associations, special volume of the 
Proceedings of the Nova Scotia Institute of Science. Presented at the First International 
Symposium on Deep Sea Corals, July 30 - August 2, 2000. 
Henry, L. 2001. Hydroids associated with deep sea corals in the boreal northwest Atlantic. J.Mar. Biol. 
Assess. UK 81:163-164. 
Herman, Y., and O. G. Andersen. 1989. Foraminifera and Pteropoda beneath the Arctic Sea ice: New 
distributions, p. 223-234. In Y. Herman (ed.), The Arctic Seas: Climatology, Oceanography, 
Geology, and Biology. 
Van Nostrand Reinhold, Berlin, Germany. 
Hiatt, T. (ed.). 2005. Economic Status of the Groundfish Fisheries off Alaska, 2004. North Pacific Fishery 
Management Council Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/economic.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Higgs, D. A., J. S. Macdonald, C. D. Levings, and B. S. Dosanjh. 1995. Nutrition and feeding habits in 
relation to life history stage, p. 159-315. In C. Groot, L. Margolis, and W.C. Clarke (eds.), 
Physiological ecology of Pacific salmon. Univ. British Columbia Press, Vancouver BC. 510 p.  
Highsmith, R. C., and K. O. Coyle. 1991. Amphipod life histories: Community structure, impact of 
temperature on decoupled growth and maturation rates, productivity, and P:B ratios. Am. Zool. 
31:861-873. 
Hobbs, R. C., and J. A. Lerczak. 1993. Abundance of Pacific white-sided dolphin and Dall’s porpoise in 
Alaska estimated from sightings in the North Pacific Ocean and the Bering Sea during 1987 
through 1991. Annual report to the MMPA Assessment Program, Office of Protected Resources, 
NMFS, NOAA, 1335 East-West Highway, Silver Spring, MD 20910. 
282
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
Hobbs, R. C., K. L. Laidre, D. J. Vos, B. A. Mahoney, and M. Eagleton. 2005. Movements and area use 
of belugas, Delphinapterus leucas, in a subarctic Alaskan estuary. Arctic 58(4):331-340. 
Hobbs, R. C., and J. M. Waite. In review. Harbor porpoise abundance in Alaska, 1997-1999. Available 
upon request from J. Waite, National Marine Mammal Laboratory, Alaska Fisheries Science 
Center, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115. 
Hobson, K. A. 1997. Pelagic cormorant (Phalacrocorax pelagicus). In A. Poole, and R. Gill (eds.), The 
Birds of North America: No. 282. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and the 
American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Hollowed, A.B., N. Bax, R. Beamish, J. Collie, M. Fogarty, P. Livingston, J. Pope, and J.C. Rice. 2000a. 
Are multispecies models an improvement on single-species models for measuring fishing impacts 
on marine ecosystems? ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57:707-719. 
Hollowed, A.B., J.N. Ianelli, and P.A. Livingston, 2000b. Including predation mortality in stock 
assessments: a case study for Gulf of Alaska walleye pollock. ICES J. Mar. Sci. 57:279-293. 
Hulbert, L. 1999. Sharks, p. 43-47. In Okey, T. and D. Pauly (eds.), A trophic mass-balance model of 
Alaska’s Prince William Sound ecosystem, for the post-spill period 1994-1996. Fisheries Centre 
Research Reports 7(4), ISSN 1198-6727. Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, 
Canada. 
Hunt, G. L., N. M. Harrison, J. F. Piatt. 1993. Diets and the selection of foraging habitat by planktivorous 
auklets in the Bering Sea, p. 18-26. In K. Vermeer, K. T. Briggs, K. H. Morgan, and D. Siegel-
Causey (eds.), Status and conservation of seabirds in the North Pacific. Proc. Pac. Seabird Group 
Symp., Victoria, BC.  Special Publication, Canadian Wildlife Service, Environment Canada. 
Hunt, G. L., R. W. Russell, K. O. Coyle, and T. Weingartner. 1998. Comparative foraging ecology of 
planktivorous auklets in relation to ocean physics and prey availability. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 167: 
241–259. 
Hunt, G. L., Jr., H. Kato, and S. M. McKinnell. 2000. Predation by Marine Birds and Mammals in the 
Subarctic North Pacific Ocean. Sidney, British Columbia, Canada, North Pacific Marine Science 
Organization. PICES Scientific Report: 165. 
Hunt, G. L., Jr., P. Stabeno, G. Walters, E. Sinclair, R.D. Brodeur, J.M. Napp, and N.A. Bond. 2002. 
Climate change and control of the southeastern Bering Sea pelagic ecosystem. Deep-Sea Res. II 
49: 5821-5853. 
Huntington, C. E., R. G. Butler, and R. A. Mauck. 1996. Leach’s storm-petrel (Oceanodroma leucorhoa). 
In A. Poole and F. Gill (eds.), The Birds of North America, No. 233. The Academy of Natural 
Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and The American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Ianelli, J., C. Minte-Vera, T. Wilderbuer, and T. Sample. 2002. Assessment of Greenland turbot stock in 
the Eastern Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, p. 255-282. In Stock Assessment and Fishery 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2002, Section 4. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2002/BSgturb.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Ianelli, J., S. Barbeaux, G. Walters, and N. Williamson. 2003. Eastern Bering Sea walleye pollock stock 
assessment. In: Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of 
the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, November 2005, Section 1, p. 39-126. North Pacific Fishery 
Management Council, 605 W 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/EBSpollock.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
283
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
Ianelli, J., S. Barbeaux, T. Honkalehto, B. Lauth, and N. Williamson, 2005. Assessment of Alaska 
Pollock Stock in the Eastern Bering Sea, p. 32-124. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation 
Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, November 2005, 
Section 1. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, 
Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/EBSPollock.pdf. 
Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Ianelli, J., T. Wilderbuer, and D. Nichol, 2006. Assessment of Greenland turbot in the Eastern Bering Sea 
and Aleutian Islands, p. 493-540. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the 
Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, November 2005, Section 5. North 
Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. 
Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIGturbot.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
IPHC [International Pacific Halibut Commission]. 1998. The Pacific halibut: biology, fishery, and 
management. Technical report No. 40. International Pacific Halibut Commission, 
P.O. Box 
95009, Seattle, WA 98145-2009. 64 p. Available at 
http://www.iphc.washington.edu/halcom/pubs/techrep/tech0040.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Ito, D. H. 1982. A cohort analysis of Pacific cean perch stocks from the Gulf of Alaska and Bering Sea 
regions. M.S thesis. Univ. Washington, Seattle WA, 157 p. 
International Whaling Commission. 1996. Report of the Scientific Committee. Rep. Int. Whal. Comm. 
46:51-97. 
Jarre, A., M. L. Palomares, V. C. Sambilay, Jr. and D. Pauly. 1991. A user's manual for MAXIMS, a 
computer program for estimating the food consumption of fishes from diel stomach contents data 
and population parameters. ICLARM Software 4, 27 p. 
Jefferson, T. A., P. A. Stacey, and R. W. Baird. 1991. A review of killer whale interactions with other 
marine mammals: predation to co-existence. Mammal Rev. 21(4): 151-180. 
Jones, I. L. 1993. Crested auklet (Aethia cristatella). In Poole A., and R. Gill (eds.), The Birds of North 
America: No. 70. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and the American 
Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Jones, B. C., and G. H. Geen, 1977. Food and feeding habits of spiny dogfish (Squalus acanthias) in 
British Columbia waters. J. Fish. Res. Bd. Canada 34: 2067-2078.  
Jones, I. L., N. B. Konyukhov, J. C. Williams, and G. V. Byrd. 2001. Parakeet auklet (Aethia psittacula). 
In A. Poole, and R. Gill (eds.), The Birds of North America: No. 594. The Academy of Natural 
Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and the American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Jurado-Molina, J. 2001. A multispecies approach to stock assessment in the Bering Sea. Ph.D. diss., Univ. 
Washington, Seattle, WA. 228 p. 
Kathman, R. D., W. C. Austin, J. C. Saltman, and J. D. Fulton. 1986. Identification manual to the 
Mysidacea and Euphausiacea of the Northeast Pacific. Can. Spec. Publ. Fish. Aquat. Sci., No. 93. 
416 p. 
Kawakami, T. 1980. A review of sperm whale food. Sci. Rep. Whales Res. Inst., 32: 199-218. 
Kawamura, A. 1980. A review of food of Balaenopterid whales. Sci. Rep. Whales Res. Inst. 32: 155-197. 
Kessler, D. W. 1985. Alaska's saltwater fishes and other sea life: a field guide. Alaska Northwest Pub., 
Anchorage, Alaska. 358 p. 
Kim, S. L., and J. S. Oliver. 1989. Swarming benthic crustaceans in the Bering and Chukchi seas and 
their relation to geographic patterns in gray whale feeding. Can. J. Zool, 67:1531-1542. 
284
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
Kimker, A., W. Donaldson, and W. Bechtol. 1996. Spot shrimp growth in Unakwik Inlet, Prince William 
Sound, Alaska. Alaska Fish. Res. Bull. (3)1:1-8. 
King, J. R., and G. A. McFarlane, 2002. Preliminary results of big skate (Raja binoculata) Age 
Determination Project. Unpublished manuscript. Canada Department of Fisheries and Oceans. 
200 Kent Street, 13th Floor, Station 13228, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1A 0E6. 
Kishi, M. J., M. Kashiwai, D. M. Ware, B. A. Megrey, D. L. Eslinger, F. E. Werner, N. M. Aita, T. 
Azumaya, M. Fujii, S. Hashimoto, D. Huang, H. Iizumi, Y. Ishida, S. Kang, G. A. Kantakov, H.­
C. Kim, K. Komatsu, V. V. Navrotsky, S. L. Smith, K. Tadokoro, A. Tsuda, O. Yamamura, Y. 
Yamanaka, K. Yokouchi, N. Yoshie, J. Zhang, Y. I. Zuenko, V. I. Zvalinsky. 2007. NEMURO— 
a lower trophic level model for the North Pacific marine ecosystem. Ecol. Modell. 202: 12–25. 
Klumov, S. K. 1962. Gladkie (Yaponskie) Kity Tikhogo Okeana. (The right whales in the Pacific Ocean). 
Trudi Instituta Okeanolgoii 58: 202-297. 
Klumov, S. K. 1963. Pitaniye I Gel'mintofauna Usatykh Kitov (Mystacoceti) V Osnovnykh 
Promyslovykh Rayonakh. 
Kotwicki, S., T. W. Buckley, T. Honkaletho, and G. Walters. 2005. Variation in the distribution of 
walleye pollock (Theragra chalcogramma) with temperature and implications for seasonal 
migration. Fish. Bull., U.S. 103:574-587. 
Krieger, K. J., and B. L. Wing. 2002. Megafauna associations with deepwater corals (Primnoa spp.) in the 
Gulf of Alaska. Hydrobiologia 471:83-90. 
Laevastu, T., and F. Favorite. 1979. Holistic simulation models of shelf seas ecosystems. NWAFC 
Processed Rep. 79-11, 48 p. Northwest and Alaska Fish. Cent., Natl. Mar. Fish. Serv., NOAA, 
7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, WA 98115. 
Laidre, K. L., K. E. W. Shelden, D. J. Rugh, and B. A. Mahoney. 2000. Beluga, Delphinapterus leucas, 
distribution and survey effort in the Gulf of Alaska. Mar. Fish. Rev. 62(3):27-36. 
Larrance, J. D., D.A. Tennant, A. J. Chester, and P. A. Ruffio. 1977. Phytoplankton and primary 
productivity in the northeast Gulf of Alaska and Lower Cook Inlet. Final Report. Environmental 
Assessment of the Alaskan Continental Shelf. Annual reports of prinicipal investigators, 
Receptors—fish, littoral, benthos, Vol. X, Outer Continential Shelf Environmental Assessment 
Program, Boulder, Colorado.  
Leatherwood, S., R. R. Reeves, and L. Foster. 1983. The Sierra Club Handbook of Whales and Dolphins. 
San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 302 p. 
Leatherwood, S. R. R. Reeves, W. F. Perrin, and W. E. Evans. 1988. Whales, dolphins, and porpoises of 
the eastern North Pacific and adjacent Arctic waters: A guide to their identification. New York: 
Dover Publications. 245 p. 
Loughlin, T. R. 1997. Using the phylogeographic method to identify Steller sea lion stocks, p. 159-171. In 
A. Dizon, S. J. Chivers, and W. F. Perrin (eds.), Molecular genetics of marine mammals. Spec. 
Publ. 3 of the Soc. Mar. Mammal. Lawrence, KS. 
Love, M. S. 1996. Probably more than you want to know about the fishes of the Pacific Coast, 2nd ed. 
Really Big Press. Santa Barbara, CA. 381 p.  
Love, M. S., C. W. Mecklenberg, T. A. Mecklenberg, and L. K. Thorsteinson, 2005. Resource inventory 
of marine and estuarine fishes of the west coast and Alaska: A checklist of North Pacific and 
Arctic Ocean species from Baja California to the Alaska-Yukon Border. U.S. Dep. Int., U.S. 
Geological Survey, Biological Resources Division, Seattle, Washington, 98104, OCS Study 
MMS 2005-030 and USGS/NBII 2005-001.  
285
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Low, L. L., G. K. Tanonaka, and H. H. Shippen 1976. Sablefish of the northeastern Pacific Ocean and 
Bering Sea. Northwest Fisheries Center Processed Report, Seattle: Northwest Fisheries Center, 
115 p. Alaska Fish. Sci. Cent., NOAA, Natl. Mar. Fish. Serv., 7600 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle 
WA 98115. 
Lowe, S. A. and R. Lauth. 2003. Assessment of Gulf of Alaska Atka mackerel, p. 699-718. In Stock 
Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, 
November 2003, Section 13. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAatka.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Lowe, S. A., J. Ianelli, M. Wilkins, K. Aydin, R. Lauth, and I. Spies. 2006. Stock assessment of Aleutian 
Islands Atka Mackerel, p. 949-1016. In Stock Assessment and Evaluation Report for the 
Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, November 2006. Section 15. North 
Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. 
Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIatka.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Lowry, L. F. 1993. Foods and Feeding Ecology. In J. J. Burns, J. J. Montague, C. J. Cowles, eds., The 
Bowhead Whale. Special Publication Number 2. Soc. Mar. Mammal.  
Lowry, L. F., K. J. Frost, D. G. Calkins, G. L. Swartzman, and S. Hills. 1982. Feeding habits, food 
requirements, and status of Bering Sea marine mammals. Final Report to the North Pacific 
Fishery Management Council. Council Document #19. Contract No. 81-4. Prepared by Alaska 
Department of Fish and Game. 
Lhning, K. 1990. Seaweeds: Their Environment, Biogeography, and Ecophysiology. John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc., New York. 
Lunsford, C. R., S. K. Shotwell, D. H. Hanselman, D. M. Clausen and D. L. Courtney. 2005. Pelagic 
Shelf Rockfish, p. 727-780. In Stock Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish 
Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2005, Section 12. North Pacific Fishery Management 
Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOApelagicrock.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Mackay, A. 1981.The generalized inverse. Practical Computing (September): 108-110. 
Macy P. T., J. M. Wall, N. D. Lampsakis, and J. E. Mason. 1978. Resources of non-salmonid pelagic 
fishes of the Gulf of Alaska and eastern Bering Sea. Part 1: Introduction, General fish resources 
and fisheries, Review of literature on non-salmonid pelagic fish resources. U.S. Dep. Commer., 
DOC/NOAA/NMFS Northwest and Alaska Fishery Science Center, unpublished manuscript; 
submitted as part of the OCSEAP program. 
Malecha, P. W., R. P. Stone, and J. Heifetz. 2005. Living substrate in Alaska: distribution, abundance, 
and species associations , p. 289-299. In P.W. Barnes and J.P. Thomas (eds.), Benthic Habitats 
and the Effects of Fishing. Am. Fish. Soc. Symp. 41, Bethesda, Maryland. 
Mantua, N. J. and S. R. Hare, Y. Zhang, J. M. Wallace, and R. C. Francis, 1997. A Pacific interdecadal 
climate oscillation with impacts on salmon production. Bull. Am. Meteorol. Soc. 78: 1069-1079. 
Manuwal, D. A., and A. C. Thoresen. 1993. Cassin’s auklet (Ptychoramphus aleuticus). In Poole A., and 
R. Gill (eds.), The Birds of North America: No. 50. The Academy of Natural Sciences, 
Philadelphia, PA, and the American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Martin, L., and G.D. Zorzi, 1993. Status and review of the California skate fishery, p. 39-52. In S. 
Branstetter (ed.), Conservation biology of elasmobranchs. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. 
Rep. NMFS 115. 
286
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
     
 
  
Mattes, L. A., 2006. Fishery management plan for the commercial Tanner crab fishery in the South 
Peninsula District of Registration Area J, 2007. Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Fishery 
Management Report No, 06-70, Anchorage, AK. Available at 
http://www.sf.adfg.state.ak.us/FedAidPDFs/fmr06-70.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Mauchline, J. 1980. The biology of mysids and euphausiids, p. 1-681. In J.H.S. Blaxter, F.S. Russell, and 
M. Yonge (eds.), Advance in Marine Biology, Vol.18.  Academic Press, London. 
McDermott, S. F. and S. A. Lowe. 1997. The reproductive cycle of Atka mackerel (Pleurogrammus. 
monopterygius) in Alaska waters. Fish. Bull., U.S. 95:231-333. 
McDonald, J., H. M. Feder, and M. Hoberg. 1981. Bivalve mollusks of the southeastern Bering Sea, p. 
1155-1204. In D. W. Hood and J. A. Calder (eds.), The Eastern Bering Sea Shelf: Oceanography 
and Resources, Volume 2. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA, Office of Marine Pollution Assessment, 
Univ. Washington Press, Seattle, WA. 
McLellan, T. 1977. Feeding strategies of the macrourids. Deep-Sea Res. 24: 1019-1036. 
McMurray, G., A. H. Vogel, P. A. Fishman, D. A. Armstrong, and S. C. Jewett. 1984. Distribution of 
larval and juvenile red king crabs (Paralithodes camtschatica) in Bristol Bay, p. 267-477. In U.S. 
Dep. Commer., NOAA, Outer Continental Shelf Environmental Assessment Program (OCSEAP) 
Final Report of Principal Investigators 53 (1986). 
Merrick, R. L., M. K. Chumbley, and G. V. Byrd. 1997. Diet diversity of Steller sea lions (Eumetopias 
jubatus) and their population decline in Alaska: a potential relationship. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 
54: 1342-1348. 
Mizroch, S. A., and D. W. Rice. 2006. Have North Pacific killer whales switched prey species in response 
to depletion of the great whale populations? Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 310: 235-246. 
Mizroch, S. A., L. M. Herman, J. M. Straley, D. Glockner-Ferrari, C. Jurasz, J. Darling, S. Cerchio, C. M. 
Gabriele, D. R. Salden, and O. von Ziegesar. 2004. Estimating the adult survival rate of central 
North Pacific humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae). J. Mammal. 85 (5): 963-972. 
Mohr, J. A. 1979. Alaska and the Sea: A survey of Alaska's Maritime History. Misc. Pub. No. 24, The 
Office of History and Archaeology, Alaska Division of Parks, 619 Warehouse Dr, Suite 210, 
Anchorage AK 99501. 
Moore, S. E. and R. R. Reeves. 1993. Distribution and movement, p. 313-86. In J. J. Burns, J. J. 
Montague, and C. J. Cowles (eds.), The Bowhead Whale. Special Publication No. 2. Soc. Mar. 
Mammal., Lawrence, KS.  
Moore, S. E., J. M. Waite, N. A. Friday, and T. Honkalehto. 2002. Distribution and comparative estimates 
of cetacean abundance on the central and south-eastern Bering Sea shelf with observations on 
bathymetric and prey associations. Progr. Oceanogr. 55(1-2):249-262. 
Moser, H. G., and E. H. Ahlstrom, 1996. Myctophidae: lanternfishes, p. 387-475. In H.G. Moser (ed.), 
The early stages of fishes in the California Current Region. California Cooperative Oceanic 
Fisheries Investigations (CalCOFI) Atlas No. 33. 1,505 p. 
Murai, S., H. A. Gangmark, and R. A. French 1981. All-nation removals of groundfish, herring, and 
shrimp from the Eastern Bering Sea and Northeast Pacific Ocean, 1964-1980. U.S. Dep. 
Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS F/NWS-14, 40 p. 
Myers, K. W., K. Y. Aydin, R. V. Walker, S. Fowler, and M. L. Dahlberg. 1996. Known ocean ranges of 
stocks of Pacific salmon and steelhead as shown by tagging experiments, 1956-1995. (NPAFC 
Doc. 192.) FRI-UW-9614. Univ. Washington, Fish. Res. Inst., Seattle. 4p. + 155 figs. and 63 
append. figs. 
287
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
Nagasawa, K. 1998. Predation by salmon sharks (Lamna ditropis) on Pacific salmon (Onchorhynchus 
spp.) in the North Pacific Ocean. Pac. Anadr. Fish Comm. Bull No. 1: 419-433. 
Nelson, J. S., 1994. Fishes of the world, Third edition. John Wiley and Sons, Inc., New York: 600 pp. 
Nelson, M. 2003. Forage fish species in the Gulf of Alaska. In: Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation 
Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Appendix A, p 757­
770. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 
99501. http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAappendixA.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Nemoto, T. 1957. Foods of baleen whales in the northern Pacific. Sci. Rep. Whales Res. Inst. 12: 33-89. 
Nemoto, T. 1959. Food of baleen whales with reference to whale movements. Sci. Rep. Whales Res. Inst. 
14: 149-290. 
Nemoto, T. 1970. Feeding pattern of baleen whales in the ocean, p. 241-252. In J. H. Steele (ed.), Marine 
food chains,. Univ. California Press, Berkeley, CA. 
Nemoto, T., and A. Kawamura. 1977. Characteristics of food habits and distribution of baleen whales 
with special reference to the abundance of North Pacific sei and Bryde's whales. Rep. Int. Whal. 
Commn. Special Issue 1: 80-87. 
Nerini, M. 1984. A review of gray whale feeding ecology, p. 
423-450. In M. L. Jones, S. L. Swartz, and 
S. Leatherwood (eds.), The Gray Whale, Eschrichtius robustus. Academic Press, Inc. Orlando, 
FL. 
Nishiwaki, M. 1972. General Biology, p. 3-204. In S. H. Ridgway (ed.), Mammals of the Sea, Biology 
and Medicine. Charles C. Thomas, Springfield, IL. 
NMFS [National Marine Fisheries Service]. 2000. Endangered Species Act—Section 7 Consultation 
Biological Opinion and Incidental Take Statement (for Steller sea lions). U.S. Dep. Commerce, 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service, Alaska 
Region, 709 W. 9th St., P.O. Box 21668, Juneau, AK. 99802. Available at 
http://www.fakr.noaa.gov/protectedresources/stellers/plb/fmp_sec07-NOV30_2000_FINAL.pdf. 
Accessed 11/9/2007. 
NMFS [National Marine Fisheries Service]. 2003. Supplement to the Endangered Species Act—Section 7 
Consultation Biological Opinion and Incidental Take Statement of October 2001. U.S. Dep. 
Commerce, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries 
Service, Alaska Region, 709 W. 9th St., P.O. Box 21668, Juneau, AK. 99802. Available at: 
http://www.fakr.noaa.gov/protectedresources/stellers/biop2002/703remand.pdf. Accessed 
11/9/2007. 
NMFS [National Marine Fisheries Service]. 2004. Alaska Groundfish Fisheries, Final Programmatic 
Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement. U.S. Dep. Commerce, National Oceanic and 
Atmospheric Administration, National Marine Fisheries Service, Alaska Region, 709 W. 9th St., 
P.O. Box 21668, Juneau, AK. 99802. Available at 
http://www.fakr.noaa.gov/sustainablefisheries/seis/intro.htm Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Novikov, N. P. 1970. Biology of Chalinura pectoralis in the North Pacific. In P. A. Moiseev (Editor), 
Soviet fisheries investigations in the northeastern Pacific, Part V (In Russian). All-Union 
Scientific Research Institute of Marine Fisheries and Oceanography (VNIRO), Proceedings Vol. 
70, and Pacific Scientific Research Institute of Fisheries and Oceanography (TINRO), 
Proceedings Vol. 72. (Translated by Israel Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem, 1972, 
p. 304-331). 
288
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
NRC [National Research Council]. 1996. The Bering Sea ecosystem. National Academy Press, 
Washington, D.C. 207 p. 
NRC [National Research Council]. 2003. Decline of the Steller sea lion in Alaskan waters; untangling 
food webs and fishing nets. National Research Council of the National Academies of Science, 
National Academies Press, Washington DC, 204 p. 
O'Clair, R. M. and C. E. O'Clair. 1998. Southeast Alaska's Rocky Shores. Animals. Plant Press, Auke 
Bay, Alaska. 561 p. 
OCSEAP [Outer Continental Shelf Environmental Assessment Program]. 1986. Marine fisheries: 
resources and environments, p. 417-458. In D. W. Hood, and S. T. Zimmerman (eds.), The Gulf 
of Alaska, Physical Environment and Biological Resources. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA, Office 
of Marine Pollution Assessment, Univ. Washington Press, Seattle, WA. 
Oedekoven, C. S., D. G Ainley, and L. B. Spear. 2001. Variable responses of seabirds to change in marine 
climate: California Current, 1985-1994. Mar Ecol. Progr. Ser. 212: 265-281. 
Okey, T., and D. Pauly (eds.). 1999. A trophic mass-balance model of Alaska’s Prince William Sound 
ecosystem, for the post-spill period 1994-1996. Fisheries Centre Research Reports 7(4), ISSN 
1198-6727. Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, Canada. 
Okutani, T. and T. Nemoto. 1964. Squids as the food of sperm whales in the Bering Sea and Alaskan 
Gulf. Sci. Rep. Whales. Res. Inst. 18:111-121. 
Olesiuk, P. F. 1993. Annual prey consumption by harbor seals (Phoca vitulina) in the Strait of Georgia, 
British Columbia. Fish. Bull., U.S. 91:491-515.  
Olesiuk, P. K., M. A. Bigg, G. M. Ellis. 1990. Life History and Population Dynamics of Resident Killer 
Whales (Orcinus orca) in the Coastal Waters of British Columbia and Washington State. Reports 
of the International Whaling Commission Special Issue(12): 209-243. 
Olson, M. B. and S. L. Strom. 2002. Phytoplankton growth, microzooplankton herbivory and community 
structure in the southeast Bering Sea: Insight into the formation and temporal persistence of an 
Emiliania huxleyi bloom. Deep-Sea Res. Part II 49: 5,969–5,990. 
Omura, H. 1958. North Pacific right whale. Sci. Rep. Whales Res. Inst. 13: 1-52. 
Omura, H., and H. Sakiura. 1956. Studies on the little piked whale from the coast of Japan. Sci. Rep. 
Whales Res. Inst. 11: 1-37. 
Omura, H., S. Ohsumi, T. Nemoto, K. Nasu, and T. Kasuya. 1969. Black right whales in the North 
Pacific. Sci. Rep. Whales Res. Inst. 21: 1-78. 
Orensanz, L.M., J. Armstrong, D. Armstrong, and R. Hilborn. 1998. Crustacean resources are vulnerable 
to serial depletion-the multifaceted decline of crab and shrimp fisheries in the greater Gulf of 
Alaska. Rev. Fish Biol.  Fish. 8: 117-176. 
Orlov, A. M. 1998. The diets and feeding habits of some deep-water benthic skates (Rajidae) in the 
Pacific waters off the northern Kuril Islands and southeastern Kamchatka. Alaska Fish. Res. Bull. 
5(1): 1-17.  
Orlov, A.M. 1999. Trophic relationships of commercial fishes in the Pacific waters off southeastern 
Kamchatka and the northern Kuril Islands, p. 231-263. In Ecosystem Approaches for Fishery 
Management, Alaska Sea Grant College Program AK-SG-99-01, University of Alaska Fairbanks. 
289
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Orlov, A. M., and S. I. Moiseev. 1999. Some biological features of Pacific sleeper shark, Somniosus 
pacificus (Bigelow et Schroeder 1944) (Squalidae) in the northwestern Pacific Ocean. 
Oceanological Studies Vol XXVIII, No. 1-2, Polish Academy of Sciences, National Scientific 
Committee on Oceanic Research, Insititue of Oceanography, University of Gdansk, PL ISSN 
1505-232X: 3-16. 
Orr, J., and J. Blackburn. 2004. The dusky rockfishes (Teleosti: Scorpaeniformes) of the North Pacific 
Ocean: Resurrection of Sebastes variabilis (Pallas, 1814) and a redescription of Sebastes ciliatus 
(Tilesius, 1813). Fish. Bull., U.S. 102:328-348. 
Orr, J., and A. Matarese. 2000. Revision of the genus Lepidopsetta Gill 1862 (Teleosti: Pleuronectidae) 
based on larval and adult morphology, with a description of a new species from the North Pacific 
Ocean and Bering Sea. Fish. Bull., U.S. 98:539-582. 
Orr, J. W., M. A. Brown, and D. C. Baker. 1998. Guide to rockfishes (Scorpaenidae) of the genera 
Sebastes, Sebastolobus, and Adelosebastes of the northeast Pacific Ocean. U.S. Dep. Commer., 
NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS-AFSC-95, 46 p. 
Paloheimo, J. E., and L. M. Dickie. 1965. Food and growth of fishes. I. A growth curve derived from 
experimental data. J. Fish. Res. Board Can. 22: 521–542. 
Paul, A. J., and J. M. Paul. 2001a. Size of maturity in male golden king crab, Lithodes aequispinus 
(Anomura: Lithodidae). J. Crustacean Biol. 21 (2): 384-387. 
Paul, A. J., and J. M. Paul. 2001b. The reproductive cycle of golden king crab Lithodes aequispinus 
(Anomura: Lithodidae). J. Shellfish Res. 20(1): 369-371. 
Pauly, D. 1986. A simple method of estimating the food consumption of fish populations from growth 
data and food conversion experiments. Fish. Bull., U.S. 84: 827–840. 
Paust, B., and R. Smith. 1989. Salmon shark manual. The development of a commercial salmon shark, 
Lamna ditropis, fishery in the North Pacific. Alaska Sea Grant College Program Report 86-01, 
Revised 1989. 
Perez, M. A. 1990. Review of marine mammal population and prey information for Bering Sea ecosystem 
studies. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS F/NWC-186, 81 p. 
Perez, M. A. and M. A. Bigg. 1986. Diet of northern fur seas, Callorhinus ursinus, off western North 
America. Fishery Bulletin 84(4): 957-971.  
Piatt, J. F. 2005. Seabird aggregation observation. Available at 
http://www.absc.usgs.gov/research/seabird_foragefish/photogallery/Picture_of_Month/Dec05­
STSH/Dec05-STSH.html. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Piatt, J. F., and A. S. Kitaysky. 2002. Tufted puffin (Fratercula cirrhata). In Poole A., and R. Gill (eds.), 
The Birds of North America: No. 708. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and 
the American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Piatt, J. F., and A. S. Kitaysky. 2002. Horned puffin (Fratercula corniculata). In Poole A., and R. Gill 
(eds.), The Birds of North America: No. 603. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, 
PA, and the American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Polovina, J. J. 1985. An approach to estimating an ecosystem box model. Fish. Bull., U.S. 83: 457-460. 
Purcell, J. E. 2001. Jellyfish as competitors and predators of fishes. Report on APEX Project number 
98163S. Available from 
http://www.evostc.state.ak.us/Files.cfm?doc=/Store/AnnualReports/1998-98163S-Annual.pdf& 
Accessed 11/9/2007.   
290
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
Purcell, J. E. 2003. Predation on zooplankton by large jellyfish, Aurelia labiata, Cyanea capillata and 
Aequorea aequorea, in Prince William Sound, Alaska. Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 246: 137-152. 
Purcell, J. E., and M. V. Sturdevant. 2001. Prey selection and dietary overlap among zooplanktivorous 
jellyfish and juvenile fishes in Prince William Sound, Alaska. Mar. Ecol. Progr. Ser. 210: 67-83. 
Radchenko, V. I. 1992. The role of squids in the pelagic ecosystem of the Bering Sea. Oceanology 32(6): 
1,093-1,101 (in Russian). 
Ream, R. R., J. D. Baker, and R. G. Towell. 1999. Bogoslof Island studies, 1997, p. 81-91. In E. H. 
Sinclair and B. W. Robson (eds.), Fur seal investigations, 1997. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA 
Tech. Memo. NMFS-AFSC-106. 
Reeves, R. R., B. S. Stewart, and S. Leatherwood. 1992. The Sierra Club Handbook of Seals and 
Sirenians. San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 359 p. 
Reuter, R., and T. TenBrink. 2006. 2006 BSAI Sculpins, p. 1,163-1,188. In Stock Assessment and 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2006. Section 20. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIsculpin.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Rice, D. W. 1968. Stomach contents and feeding behavior of killer whales in the Eastern North Pacific. 
Norsk Hvalfangst-Tidende 2: 35-38. 
Rice, R. L. 1981. Feeding habits of crangonid shrimps and some aspects of sediment-detrital food systems 
in lower Cook Inlet, Alaska. NOAA/OMPA Principal Investigation Report on the Environmental 
Assessment of the Alaskan Continental Shelf, Vol. 14, Biological Studies, p.611-676. 
Rice, D. W. 1986. Beaked whales, p. 102-109. In D. Haley (ed.), Marine Mammals of Eastern North 
Pacific and Arctic Waters, Second Edition, Revised. Pacific Search Press. 
Rice, D. W. 1989. Sperm whale, Physeter macrocephalus, p. 177-233. In S. H. Ridgway and R. Harrison 
(eds.), Handbook of Marine Mammals. Vol. 4. River Dolphins and the Larger Toothed Whales. 
Academic Press, New York. 
Rice, J. C. 2000. Evaluating fishery impacts using metrics of community structure. ICES J. Mar. Sci., 57: 
682-688. 
Rice, J. C. 2003. Environmental health indicators. Ocean & Coastal Management 46: 235–259.  
Rice, D. W., and A. A. Wolman. 1971. The life history and ecology of the gray whale (Eschrichtius 
robustus). The American Society of Mammalogists, Special Publication No. 3. 142 p. 
Rigby, P. W., D. R. Ackley, F. Funk, H. J. Geiger, G. H. Kruse, and M. C. Murphy. 1995. Management of 
marine fisheries resources of Alaska: a report to the Northern Forum. Alaska Department of Fish 
and Game Regional Information Report Number 5J95-04, available at 
http://www.cf.adfg.state.ak.us/geninfo/pubs/n_forum/n_forum.php. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Robards, M. D., J. F. Piatt, G. A. Rose. 1999. Maturation, fecundity, and intertidal spawning of Pacific 
sand lance in the northern Gulf of Alaska. J. Fish Biol. 54 (5): 1,050–1,068. 
Rogers, D. E. 1987. Pacific salmon. Chapter 15 in D. W. Hood, and S.T. Zimmerman (eds.), The Gulf of 
Alaska, Physical Environment and Biological Resources. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA, 
Office of 
Marine Pollution Assessment, Univ. Washington Press, Seattle, WA. 
Rogers, D. E. 2001. Estimates of annual salmon runs from the North Pacific, 1951-2001. Univ. 
Washington School of Aquatic & Fishery Sciences, Seattle WA. Report AFS-UW 0115. 11 p. 
291
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Roper, C. F. E., M. J. Sweeney, and C. E. Nauen. 1984. FAO Species Catalogue Vol. 3, Cephalopods of 
the world. An annotated and illustrated catalogue of species of interest to fisheries. FAO Fisheries 
Synopsis No. 125, Vol. 3. 
Rugh, D. J., R. C. Hobbs, J. A. Lerczak, and J. M. Breiwick. 2005. Estimates of abundance of the eastern 
North Pacific stock of gray whales 1997-2002. J. Cetacean Res. Manage. 7(1):1-12. 
Ryer, C. H., A.W. Stoner, and R.H. Titgen. 2004. Behavioral mechanisms underlying the refuge value of 
benthic habitat structure for two flatfishes with differing anti-predator strategies. Mar. Ecol. 
Progr. Ser. 268: 231-243. 
Sagalkin, N. H. 2004. Fishery management plan for the commercial Tanner crab fishery in the Kodiak 
District of Registration Area J, 2005. Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Fishery Management 
Report No. 04-13, Kodiak. Available at 
http://www.cf.adfg.state.ak.us/region4/shellfsh/crabs/mgtplans/2005/fmr04-13.pdf. 
Sagalkin, N. H. 2006. Fishery management plan for the commercial Tanner crab fishery in the Kodiak 
District of Registration Area J, 2007. Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Fishery Management 
Report No. 06-08, Kodiak. Available at http://www.sf.adfg.state.ak.us/FedAidPDFs/fmr06­
68.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Sambrotto, R. N., and C. J. Lorenzen. 1987. Phytoplankton and Primary Production, p. 249-282. In D. W. 
Hood, and S.T. Zimmerman (eds.), The Gulf of Alaska, Physical Environment and Biological 
Resources. U.S. Dep. Commer., NOAA, 
Office of Marine Pollution Assessment, Univ. 
Washington Press, Seattle, WA. 
Scarff, J. E. 2001. Preliminary estimates of whaling induced mortality in the 19th century North Pacific 
right whale (Eubalaena japonicus) fishery, adjusting for struck-but-lost whales and non-
American whaling. J. Cetacean Res. Manage. (Special Issue) 2: 261-268. 
Schmitt, W. L. 1968. Crustaceans. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor. 204 p. 
Schreiber, E. A., and J. Burger. 2002. Biology of Marine Birds. CRC Press LLC, USA 219 p. 
Shelden, K. E. W., and D. J. Rugh. 1995. The Bowhead Whale, Balaena mysticetus: Its Historic and 
Current Status. Mar. Fish. Rev. 57(3-4):1-20. 
Shelden, K. E. W., S. E. Moore, J. M. Waite, P. W. Wade, and D. M. Rugh. 2005. Historic and current 
habitat use by North Pacific Right whales Eubalaena japonica in the Bering Sea and Gulf of 
Alaska. Mammal Rev. 35(2): 129-155. 
Shields, E. 2001. Salt of the Sea. The Pacific coast cod fishery and the last days of sail. Lopez Island, 
WA: Pacific Heritage Press, 238 p. 
Shotwell, S. K., 
D. Hanselman, and D. M. Clausen. 2005. Rougheye Rockfish, p. 641-684. In Stock 
Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, 
November 2005, Section 10. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOArougheye.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Sibley, D. A. 2000. National Audubon Society The Sibley Guide to Birds. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 
544 p. 
Sigler, M. F., C. R. Lunsford, J. T. Fujioka, and S. A. Lowe. 2004. Alaska Sablefish Assessment for 2005, 
p. 303-368. In Stock Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the 
Bering Sea, Aleutian Islands, and Gulf of Alaska, November 2004, Section 3. North Pacific 
Fishery Management Council, 605 W 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2004/BSAIsablefish.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
292
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
Siler, W. 1979. Competing risk model for animal mortality. Ecology 60 (4): 750-757. 
Sinclair, E. H., and T. K. Zeppelin. 2002. Seasonal and spatial differences in diet in the Western stock of 
Steller Sea lions. J. Mammal. 83(4) 973-990. 
Sinclair, E. H., A. A. Balanov, T. Kubodera, V. I. Radchenko, and Y. A. Fedorets. 1999. Distribution and 
ecology of mesopelagic fishes and cephalopods, p. 485-508. In Dynamics of the Bering Sea (T.R. 
Loughlin and K Ohtani, eds.), Alaska Sea Grant College Program AK-SG-99-03, University of 
Alaska Fairbanks. 
Slizkin, A. G. 1989.Tanner crabs (Chionoecetes opilio, C. bairdi) of the Northwest Pacific: Distribution, 
biological peculiarities, and population structure, p. 27-34. In Proceedings of the International 
Symposium on King and Tanner crabs. Alaska Sea Grant College Program, AK-SG-90-04. 
Small, R. J. 1996. Population assessment of harbor seals in Alaska: Report of a workshop held in 
Fairbanks, Alaska, November 14-16, 1995. 36 p. 
Smith, S. L. 1991. Growth, development and distribution of the euphausiids Thysanoessa raschi (M. Sars) 
and Thysanoessa inermis (Krøyer) in the southeastern Bering Sea. Polar Res. 10(2): 461-478. 
Sorokin, Y. I., P. Y. Sorokin, O. V. Sorokina, and T. I. Mamaeva. 1995. Primary production and 
heterotrophic microplankton in Okhotsk Sea. J. Gen. Biol. 56: 603-628 (in Russian). 
Sosebee, K., 1998. Spiny Dogfish and Skates, p. 112-115. In S.H. Clark (ed.), Status of fishery resources 
off the northeastern United States for 1998. U. S. Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS­
NE-115. 
Spencer, P. D., and J. N. Ianelli. 2006. Pacific ocean perch, p. 781-838. In Stock Assessment and 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2006, Section 11. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIpop.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Spencer, P. D, G. E. Walters, and T. K. Wilderbuer. 2004. Alaska plaice, p. 617-664. In Stock 
Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian 
Islands, November 2004, Section 9. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th 
Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2004/BSAIalaskaplaice.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Springer, A.M. 1991. Seabird distribution as related to food webs and the environment: Examples from 
the North Pacific Ocean. Can. Wildl. Serv. Occas. Pap. No. 68: 39–48. 
Springer, A. M., J. A. Estes, G. B. van Vliet, T. M. Williams, D. F. Doak, E. M. Danner, K. A. Forney, 
and B. Pfister. 2003. Sequential megafaunal collapse in the North Pacific Ocean: An ongoing 
legacy of industrial whaling? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 100(21): 12,223-12,228. 
Stabeno, P. J., N. A. Bond, N. B. Kachel, S. A. Salo, and J. D. Schumacher. 2001. On the temporal 
variability of the physical environment over the southeastern Bering Sea. Fish. Oceanogr. 10:81­
98. 
Stevens, B. G., and P. J. Anderson. 2000. An association between the anemone, Cribrinopsis fernaldi, and 
the shrimps of the families Pandalidiae and Hippolytidae. 
J. Northwest Atl. Fish. Sci. 27:77­
82. 
Stevens, B. G., and R. A. MacIntosh. 1991. Cruise Results Supplement, Cruise OH-91-1. A survey of 
juvenile red king crabs with dredge and beam trawl in Bristol Bay, Alaska. Available from 
NMFS, Kodiak Fisheries Research Center, 301 Research Ct., Kodiak, AK 99615. 14 p. 
293
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
Stevens, B. G, R. A. MacIntosh, J. A. Haaga, C. E. Armistad, and R. S. Otto. 2002. Report to industry on 
the 2002 eastern Bering Sea crab survey. AFSC Processed Report 2002-05, 59 p. Alaska Fish. 
Sci. Cent., Natl. Mar. Fish. Serv., NOAA, Kodiak Fishery Research Center, 301 Research Court, 
Kodiak, AK 99615. 
Stockhausen, W. T., B. J. Turnock, M. E. Wilkins, and M. E. Martin. 2005. Gulf of Alaska flathead sole 
stock assessment, p. 473-523. In Stock Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish 
Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2005, Section 7. North Pacific Fishery Management 
Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOAflathead.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Stockhausen, W. T., P. D. Spencer, and D. Nichol. 2006. Chapter 8: Flathead sole, p. 653-720. In Stock 
Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian 
Islands, November 2006, Section 8. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th 
Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIflathead.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Stone, R. P., C. E. O'Clair, and T. C. Shirley. 1993. Aggregating behavior of ovigerous female red king 
crab, Paralithodes camtschaticus, in Auke Bay, Alaska. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 50: 750-758. 
Strom, S. L., M. A. Brainard, J. L. Holmes, and M. B. Olson. 2001. Phytoplankton blooms are strongly 
impacted by microzooplankton grazing in coastal North Pacific waters. Mar. Biol. 138: 355-368. 
Tanaka, S. 1980. Biological investigation of Lamna ditropis in the north-western waters of the North 
Pacific. In Report of investigation on sharks as a new marine resource (1979). Published by: 
Japan Marine Fishery Resource Research Center, Tokyo [English abstract, translation by 
Nakaya]. 
Tarverdieva, M. I. 1981. About feeding of Chionoecetes opilio and C. bairdi in the Bering Sea. 
Zoologichesky Zhurnal. [J. Zool.] 60(7): 991-997 (in Russian). 
Thompson, G. G., and M. W. Dorn. 2005. Chapter 2: Assessment of the Pacific cod stock in the Gulf of 
Alaska, p. 155-244. In Stock Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of 
the Gulf of Alaska, November 2005, Section 2. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 
W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at
 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOAPcod.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007.
 
Thompson, G. G., H. H. Zenger, and M.W. Dorn. 2003. Chapter 2: Assessment of the Pacific cod stock in 
the Gulf of Alaska, p. 149-242. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the 
Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 2. North Pacific Fishery 
Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOApcod.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Thompson, G. G., M. W. Dorn, S. K. Gaichas, and K. Y. Aydin 2006. Chapter 2: Assessment of the 
Pacific cod stock in the Eastern Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands Area, p. 237-340. In Stock 
Assessment and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian 
Islands, November 2006, Section 2. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th 
Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIPcod.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Tillman, M. F. 1977. Estimates of population size for the North Pacific sei whale. Rept. Int. Whal. 
Commn., Special Issue 1: 98-106. 
Tokranov, A. M., 1985. Reproduction of great sculpin, Myoxocephalus polyacanthocephalus (Cottidae) in 
Kamchatka waters. J. Ichthyol. 24(4): 119-127. 
294
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
  
 
  
  
Tomilin, A. G. 1957. Kitoobraznye (Cetacea). Vol. 9 of Zveri SSSR I prilezhashohikh stran. Ized. Akad. 
Nauk SSSR, Moscow. (Mammals of the U.S.S.R. and adjacent countries.) Translation by Israel 
Program for Scientific Translations, Jerusalem 1967. 
Trites, A. W., P. A.Livingston, M. C. Vasconcellos, S. Mackinson, A. M. Springer, and D. Pauly. 1999. 
Ecosystem change and the decline of marine mammals in the Eastern Bering Sea: Testing the 
ecosystem shift and commercial whaling hypotheses. UBC Fish. Cent. Rep. 7(1): 106 p. 
Tuponogov, V. N. 1997. Seasonal migrations of the grenadier Coryphaenoides pectoralis in the Sea of 
Okhotsk and contiguous waters. Russ. J. Mar. Biol. 23(6):314-321. 
Turnock, B. J., and Z. T. A’mar. 2004a. Gulf of Alaska Dover Sole, p. 304-334. In Stock Assessment and 
Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, November 2004, 
Section 4. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, 
Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2004/GOAdover.pdf. 
Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Turnock, B. J., and Z. T. A’mar. 2004b. Gulf of Alaska Rex Sole Stock Assessment, p. 335-376. In Stock 
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, 
November 2004, Section 4. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2004/GOArex.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Turnock, B. J., and Z. T. A’mar. 2005. Gulf of Alaska Rex Sole Stock Assessment, p. 399-434. In Stock 
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, 
November 2005, Section 4. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOArex.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Turnock, B. J., and T. J. Quinn. 1991. The effect of responsive movement on abundance estimation using 
line transect sampling. Biometrics 47:701-715. 
Turnock, B. J., T. K. Wilderbuer, and E. S. Brown. 2003a. Arrowtooth flounder, p. 369-406. In Stock 
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, 
November 2003, Section 5. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAatf.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Turnock, B. J., T. K. Wilderbuer, and E. S. Brown. 2003b. Gulf of Alaska flatfish, p. 313-340. In Stock 
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, 
November 2003, Section 4. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAflats.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Turnock B. J., T. K. Wilderbuer, and E. S. Brown. 2003c. Gulf of Alaska flathead sole stock assessment, 
p. 407-428. In Stock Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of 
the Gulf of Alaska, November 2003, Section 6. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 
W. 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at
 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/GOAfhs.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Turnock, B. J., T. K. Wilderbuer, and E. S. Brown. 2005. Gulf of Alaska flatfish, p. 317-350. In Stock 
Assessment and Fishery Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Gulf of Alaska, 
November 2005, Section 4. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2005/GOAflat.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
295
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1988. Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge: Final comprehensive 
conservation plan, wilderness review and environmental impact statement. U.S. Fish Wildl. Serv., 
Anchorage, AK. 
U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 2003. Beringian Seabird Colony Catalog -- computer database. U.S. Fish 
and Wildlife Service, Migratory Bird Management, Anchorage, Alaska 99503.  
Valiela, I., 1995. Marine Ecological Processes, 2nd Ed. Springer, New York. 696 p. 
Verbeek, N. A. M. 1993. Glaucous-winged Gull (Larus glaucescens). In Poole A., and R. Gill (eds.), The 
Birds of North America: No. 59. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and the 
American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Volvenko, I. V. 1995. Mechanisms of regulation of abundance dynamics and productive biology of 
hermit crabs. Vladivostok. Dalnauka. 284 p. (in Russian). 
Wada, S. 1973. The ninth memorandum on the stock assessment of whales in the North Pacific. Rep. Int. 
Whal. Comm. 23:164-169. 
Hobbs, R. C., and J. M. Waite. In review. Harbor porpoise abundance in Alaska, 1997-1999. Available 
upon request from J. Waite, National Marine Mammal Laboratory, 7600 Sand Point Way NE, 
Seattle, WA 98115. 
Waite, J. M., N. A. Friday, and S. E. Moore. 2002. Killer whale (Orcinus orca) distribution and 
abundance in the central and southeastern Bering Sea, July 1999 and June 2000. Mar. Mammal 
Sci. 18: 779-786. 
Wakefield, W.W. 1984. Feeding relationships within assemblages of nearshore and mid-continental shelf 
benthic fishes off Oregon. M.S. thesis, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR. 
Walker, W. A., and M. B. Hanson. 1999. Biological observations on Stejneger's beaked whale, 
Mesoplodon stejnegeri, from strandings on Adak Island, Alaska. Mar. Mammal Sci. 15(4): 1,314­
1,329. 
Walker, W. A., M. B. Hanson, R. W. Baird, and T. J. Guenther. 1998. Food habits of the harbor porpoise, 
Phocoena phocoena, and Dall's porpoise, Phocoenoides dalli, in the inland waters of British 
Columbia and Washington, p. 63-75. In P. S. Hill, B. Jones, and D. P. DeMaster (eds.), Marine 
Mammal Protection Act and Endangered Species Act implementation program 1997. AFSC 
Processed Rep. 98-10. Alaska Fish. Sci. Cent., 7600 Sand Point Way NE., Seattle, WA 98115. 
Walters, C., V. Christensen, and D. Pauly. 1997. Structuring dynamic models of exploited ecosystems 
from trophic mass-balance assessments. Rev. Fish. Biol. Fish. 7: 139-172. 
Watt, J. P., D. B. Sniff, and J. A. Estes. 2000. Interdecadal patterns of population and dietary change in 
sea otters at Amchitka Island, Alaska. Oecologia 124:289-298. 
Webb, R. L. 1988. On the Northwest: Commercial Whaling in the Pacific Northwest, 1790-1967. 
Vancouver: UBC Press, 425 p. 
Whittow, G. C. 1993a. Black-footed albatross (Diomedea nigripes). In A. Poole, and R. Gill (eds.), The 
Birds of North America: No. 65. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and the 
American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
Whittow, G. C. 1993b. Laysan albatross (Diomedea immutabilis). In A. Poole, and R. Gill (eds.), The 
Birds of North America: No. 66. The Academy of Natural Sciences, Philadelphia, PA, and the 
American Ornithologists’ Union, Washington, D.C. 
296
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wilderbuer, T. K., and D. Nichol. 2004a. Yellowfin Sole, p. 369-426. In Stock Assessment and 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2004, Section 4. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2004/BSAIyfs.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Wilderbuer, T. K., and D. Nichol. 2004b. Northern rock sole, p. 501-550. In Stock Assessment and 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2004, Section 7. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2004/BSAIrocksole.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Wilderbuer, T. K. and D. Nichol. 2006a. Yellowfin sole. In: Stock Assessment and Evaluation Report for 
the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, November 2006, Section 4, p. 
429-492. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W 4th Avenue, Suite 306, Anchorage, 
AK 99501. Available at http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIyfin.pdf. Accessed 
11/9/2007. 
Wilderbuer, T. K. and D. Nichol. 2006b. Northern rock sole, p. 591-652. In Stock Assessment and 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2006, Section 7. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIrocksole.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Wilderbuer, T. K., and T. M. Sample. 2003. Arrowtooth flounder, p. 367-408. In Stock Assessment and 
Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2003, Section 6. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2003/BSAIatf.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Wilderbuer, T. K., D. G. Nichol, and P. D. Spencer. 2006.Other flatfish, p. 769-780. In Stock Assessment 
and Evaluation Report for the Groundfish Resources of the Bering Sea and Aleutian Islands, 
November 2006, Section 10. North Pacific Fishery Management Council, 605 W. 4th Avenue, 
Suite 306, Anchorage, AK 99501. Available at 
http://www.afsc.noaa.gov/refm/docs/2006/BSAIoflat.pdf. Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Williams, E. H., and T. J. Quinn II. 2000. Pacific herring, Clupea pallasi, recruitment in the Bering Sea 
and north-east Pacific Ocean, I: relationships among different populations. Fish. Oceanogr. 9(4): 
285-299. 
Wilson, M. T., A. H. Andrews, A. L., Brown, and E. E. Cordes. 2002. Axial rod growth and age 
estimation of the sea pen, Halipteris willemoesi Koelliker. Hydrobiologia 471:133-142. 
Winship, A. J., A .W. Trites, and D. G. Calkins. 2001. Growth in body size of the Steller sea lion 
(Eumetopias jubatus). J. Mammal. 82(2): 500-519. 
Woodby, D., D. Carlile, S. Siddeek, F. Funk, J.H. Clark, and L. Hulbert. 2005. Commercial Fisheries of 
Alaska. Alaska Department of Fish and Game, Special Publication No. 05-09, Anchorage. 
Available at: http://www.sf.adfg.state.ak.us/FedAidPDFs/sp05-09.pdf  Accessed 11/9/2007. 
Yang, M., and B. N. Page. 1999. Diet of Pacific sleeper shark, Somniosus pacificus, in the Gulf of Alaska. 
Fish. Bull., U.S. 97:406-409 
Yano, K., and M. E. Dahlheim. 1995. Behavior of killer whales Orcinus orca during longline fishery 
interactions in the Southeastern Bering Sea and adjacent waters. Fish. Sci. 61(4): 584-589. 
297
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
York, A. 1994. The population dynamics of northern sea lions, 1975-1985. Mar. Mammal Sci. 10(1):38­
51. 
Zaika, V. E. 1983. The comparative productivity of hydrobionts (Sravnitelnaya Productivnost 
Gidrobiontov). Naukova Dumka, Kiev, 206 pp (in Russian).  
Zeh, J. E., J. C. George, and R. Suydam. 1995. Population size and rate of increase, 1978-1993, of 
bowhead whales, Balaena mysticetus. Rep. Int. Whal. Commn. 45: 339-344. 
Zeh, J., D. Poole, G. Miller, W. Koski, and L. Baraff, and D. Rugh. 2002. Survival of bowhead whales, 
Balaena mysticetus, estimated from 1981-1998 photoidentification data. Biometrics 58(4): 832­
840. 
Zeiner, S. J., and P. Wolf, 1993. Growth characteristics and estimates of age at maturity of two species of 
skates (Raja binoculata and Raja rhina) from Monterey Bay, California, p. 39-52. In S. 
Branstetter (ed.), Conservation biology of elasmobranchs. U. S. Dep. Commer., NOAA Tech. 
Rep. NMFS 115. 
Zerbini, A. N., J. M. Waite, J. L. Laake, and P. R. Wade. 2006. Abundance, trends and distribution of 
baleen whales off Western Alaska and the central Aleutian Islands. Deep Sea Res. I. 53: 1,772– 
1,790. 
Zhou, S., and T. C. Shirley. 1998. A submersible study of red king crab and Tanner crab distribution by 
habitat and depth. J. Shellfish Res. 17: 1,477-1,479.  
Zimmerman, M. 1997. Maturity and fecundity of arrowtooth flounder, Atheresthes stomias, from the Gulf 
of Alaska. Fish. Bull., U.S. 95:598-611. 
Zimushko, V. V., and S. A. Lenskaya. 1970. Feeding of the gray whale (Eschrichtius gibbosus Erx.) at 
foraging grounds. Ekologiya 1:26-35. Translation by Consultant's Bureau, Plenum Publishing 
Corporation, New York. 
298
 
  
RECENT TECHNICAL MEMORANDUMS
 
Copies of this and other NOAA Technical Memorandums are available from the 
National Technical Information Service, 5285 Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 22167 
(web site: www.ntis.gov). Paper and microfiche copies vary in price. 
AFSC­
177 	 YANG, M-S. 2007. Food habits and diet overlap of seven skate species in the Aleutian Islands,, 46 p. 
NTIS No. PB2008-102387. 
176	 LAUTH, R. R., and E. ACUNA. 2007. Results of the 2006 eastern Bering Sea continental shelf bottom 
trawl survey of groundfish and invertebrate resources, 175 p. NTIS PB2008-100452. 
175	 IVASHCHENKO,Y. V., P. J. CLAPHAM, and R. L. BROWNELL JR. (editors). 2007. Scientific reports 
of Soviet whaling expeditions in the North Pacific, 1955-1978, 34 p. [Translation: Y. V. Ivashchenko] + 
Appendix. NTIS No. PB2007112474. 
174	 TESTA, J. W. (editor). 2007.  Fur seal in vestigations, 2004-2005, 76 p.  NTIS No. PB2007-112500. 
173	 SIGLER, M. F., D. FALVEY, C. R. LUNSFORD, K. BARKHAU, and L. BEHNKEN. 2007. Product 
recovery rates for bled sablefish, 14 p. NTIS No. PB2007-112003. 
172	 MALECHA, P. W., D. H. HANSELMAN, and J. HE IFETZ. 2007. Growth and mortality of rockfishes 
(Scorpaenidae) from Alaska waters, 61 p. NTIS No. PB2007-112002. 
171	 HJELLVIK, V., and A. De ROBERTIS. 2007. Vessel comparison on the seabed echo: Influence of 
vessel attitude, 34 p. NTIS No. PB2007-111255. 
170	 RODGVELLER, C. J., J. H. MOSS, and A. M. FELDMANN. 2007. The influence of sampling location, 
timing, and hatching origin on the prediction of energy density in juvenile pink salmon, 27 p. NTIS No. 
PB2007-110270. 
169	 PELLA, J., and J. MASELKO. 2007.  Probability samp ling and estimation of the oil remaining in 2001 
from the Exxon Valdez oil spill in Prince William Sound, 58 p. NTIS No. PB2007-110269. 
168	 ANGLISS, R. P., and R. B. OUTLAW.  2007. Alaska marine mammal stock assessments, 2006, 
244 p. NTIS No. PB 2007-106476. 
167	 PEREZ, M. A. 2006. Analysis of marine mammal bycatch data from the trawl, longline, and pot 
groundfish fisheries of Alaska,1998-2004, defined by geographic area, gear type, and catch target 
groundfish species, 194 p.  NTIS No. PB2007-106475. 
166	 WING, B. L, M. M. MASUDA, and S. G. T AYLOR. 2006. Time series analyses of physical 
environmental data records from Auke Bay, Alaska, 75 p. NTIS No. PB2007-101890. 
165	 EILER, J. H., T. R. SPENCER, J. J. PELLA, and M. M. MASUDA. 2006.  Stock composition, run 
timing, and movement patterns of Chinook salmon returning to the Yukon River Basin in 2004, 107 p. 
NTIS No. PB2007-102224. 
164	 YANG, M-S., K. DODD, R. HIBPSHMAN, and A. WHITEHOUSE. 2006. Food habits of groundfishes in 
the Gulf of Alaska in 1999 and 2001, 199 p. NTIS No. PB2006-112369. 
163	 EILER, J. H., T. R. SPENCER, J. J. PELLA, and M. M. MASUDA. 2006. Stock composition, run timing, 
and movement patterns of chinook salmon returning to the Yukon River basin in 2003, 104 p.NTIS No. 
PB2006-108429. 
162	 IGNELL, S. E., B. L. WING, B. D. EBBERTS, and M. M. MASUDA. 2006.  Abundance and spatial pattern 
of salps within the North Pacific Subarctic Frontal Zone,  August 1991, 26 p.  NTIS No. PB2006-108423. 