Title: Supporting Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management in meeting multiple objectives for 
sustainable use of coral reef ecosystems  
Running title: Fishing policy scenario explorations in Hawaiʻi  
Authors: Mariska Weijerman1, Zack S. Oyafuso2, Kirsten M. Leong1, Kirsten L.L. Oleson3, 
Morgan Winston1,4 
Affiliations:  
1Pacific Islands Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, Honolulu, HI 96818 
2Alaska Fisheries Science Center, NOAA Fisheries, Seattle, WA 98115 
3Dept. of Natural Resources and Environmental Management, University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, 
Honolulu, HI 96822 
4Joint Institute for Marine and Atmospheric Research, University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa, 
Honolulu, HI 96822 
 
Key words: trade-offs, reef-based fishery, deepwater-based fishery, social-ecological system 
(SES), Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management (EBFM), Hawaiʻi, coral reef ecosystems, 
Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) 
Abstract 
Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management is a holistic management approach that integrates the 
dynamics of an entire ecosystem, including societal dimensions. However, this approach seldom 
lives up to its promise because economic and social objectives are rarely specified. To fill this 
gap, we explored how an ecosystem model could better integrate economic and social objectives, 
using the coral reef ecosystem around Hawai`i as a case study. After meeting with stakeholders 
and conducting a literature review of policy/strategy documents, we identified societal and 
ecological objectives and associated performance indicators for which data existed. We 
developed a social-ecological system (SES) conceptual framework to illustrate the relationships 
between ecological and social state components. This framework was the foundation for the 
development of the final SES model which we simulated using an Ecopath with Ecosim model. 
We simulated four gear/species restrictions for the reef-based fishery, two fishing scenarios 
associated with the opening of hypothetical no-take Marine Protected Areas for the deepwater-
based fishery, and a Constant Effort (No Action) scenario. Despite limitations in the model, our 
approach shows that when social and economic objectives and social-ecological relationships are 
defined, we can visualize and quantify the trade-offs among the identified societal objectives to 
support managers in choosing among alternative interventions. 
Introduction 
In the last decades, many national and international organizations have moved away from single-
species management to embrace Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management (EBFM), an approach 
that explicitly integrates political, governance, social, and economic considerations (Link and 
Browman, 2017). For example, the U.S. NOAA Fisheries’ vision and policy statements promote 
moving towards EBFM with regional implementation programs (Townsend et al., 2019). The 
agency outlines six guiding principles in its EBFM roadmap: implement ecosystem-level 
planning, advance understanding of ecosystem processes, prioritize vulnerabilities and risks to 
ecosystems and their components, explore and address trade-offs within an ecosystem, 
incorporate ecosystem considerations into management advice, and maintain resilient ecosystems 
(NOAA Fisheries, 2016). EBFM’s holistic approach considers the dynamics of and feedbacks 
between components of the social-ecological system (SES) with the overall goal to sustain or 
increase the ecosystem goods and services upon which society relies. Fisheries management has 
generally focused on biological objectives while economic and especially social objectives were 
stated in very broad, non-specific terms (Benson and Stephenson, 2018). However, for EBFM to 
be effective, comprehensive (social and natural) scientific research should clearly be linked with 
a complete set of management objectives (Harvey et al., 2017). Implementation of EBFM has 
been slow in part because the non-biological objectives are often underdeveloped and overlooked 
(Arkema et al., 2006; Link and Browman, 2017). Managers need tools to help them assess trade-
offs among all objectives – biological, social, and economic – from potential management 
alternatives. 
A key tool for EBFM, ecosystem models can provide natural resource managers with an 
integrative view of how an ecosystem will likely respond to a diverse set of management options 
(Clark et al., 2001) and help understand to what extent these options will achieve objectives to 
meet society’s needs (e.g., Weijerman et al., 2016). Ecosystem models represent essential 
ecosystem dynamics and have the ability to simulate the entire ecosystem from primary 
producers through top predators to human uses (an “end-to-end” model) under climate 
projections (Grüss et al., 2017). Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE; Christensen and Walters, 2004) is 
an example of an end-to-end ecosystem model that can integrate physical, ecological, and some 
socio-economic dynamics. For fisheries management, EwE models generally represent socio-
economic dynamics through commercial fisheries. In general, the ability of ecosystem models to 
quantify economic and social impacts is still far behind their capacity to quantify ecological 
impacts, partly because of the lack of specificity in social objectives, but also because the social-
ecological relationships are often poorly defined (Link and Browman, 2017). 
The ability of the ecological system to support desired social outcomes is tied to biological, 
climate, and ocean characteristics (Nadon et al., 2012; Williams et al., 2015), and to human 
impacts on these systems (e.g., Mora et al., 2011; Williams et al., 2011). Unfortunately, 
unsustainable exploitation and habitat degradation have led to less productive coral reef 
ecosystems globally (Birkeland, 2019) and in Hawaiʻi (Friedlander et al., 2008; Williams et al., 
2008), reducing the benefits to society (Kittinger et al., 2015). Hawaiʻi is an ideal case study for 
integrating social and economic objectives in ecosystem models as multiple management 
agencies have embraced an SES approach. Federal managers (NOAA) have embraced EBFM 
specifically; the State of Hawaiʻi Division of Aquatic Resources (DAR) is working to effectively 
manage 30% of the coastline by 2030 and three of the four project pillars are economic, social, 
and governance; for the West Hawaiʻi Integrated Ecosystem Assessment and the development of 
the Hawaiʻi Atlantis ecosystem model, NOAA scientists in collaboration with local stakeholders 
have been working to identify social objectives and indicators of ecosystem services and human 
well-being. While the overall conceptual foundation is stipulated for many of these initiatives, 
the next step is to operationalize in an integrated way. This study builds on the foundational 
work of ecosystem-level planning conducted by NOAA scientists and colleagues (e.g. 
Weijerman, 2017; Leong et al., 2019; Weijerman et al., 2019) and explores the remaining five 
guiding principles to operationalize EBFM. 
 
Our objectives for this study were: (1) to develop an SES framework; (2) to identify specific 
social and economic objectives; and (3) to quantify social-ecological trade-offs by linking social 
and economic components to an ecological model. While the social and ecological systems 
around the individual Hawaiian islands are heterogeneous (e.g. with differences in coral cover, 
fish biomass, human population, accessibility to coastlines, fishing pressure, etc), this research 
demonstrates an approach to include social and economic objectives in an integrated SES model, 
providing quantitative and predictive information on the response of marine ecosystems to 
alternative scenarios. The approach could guide EBFM in coral reef areas. 
Methods 
Study area 
The Hawaiian Archipelago is a chain of islands, atolls, islets, and seamounts spanning a distance 
of about 2,400 km from the island of Hawaiʻi at the southeast to Kure Atoll furthest northwest. 
Our study area encompassed the nearshore marine ecosystems of the inhabited Hawaiian Islands 
with, from southeast to northwest, the islands of Hawaiʻi, Kahoʻolawe, Maui, Lānaʻi, Molokaʻi, 
Oʻahu, Kauaʻi, and Niʻihau (Fig. 1). These eight islands span from 155° East to 160° West and 
19° to 22° North. While Kahoʻolawe is not inhabited, its coral reefs are linked to those of the 
inhabited islands. Population per island ranges from < 200 on Niʻihau to about one million on 
Oʻahu where nearly 70% of the state’s inhabitants live (U.S. Census Bureau).  
Development of social-ecological conceptual system framework 
Based on literature and available data, we developed a conceptual SES framework to visualize 
existing relationships between the societal importance of ecological state components and the 
changes in ecological and social state components as a response to anthropogenic impacts. We 
generally followed a Driver, Pressure, State, Ecosystem Service, and Response (DPSER) 
approach (Kelble et al., 2013) where we first considered broader drivers of ecological state. We 
then considered how to represent core elements of the social state that depend on the ecological 
state. In the DPSER approach, desired social outcomes (state of the social system) are related to 
ecosystem services (the benefits people receive from nature) and human well-being (measures of 
quality of life; Kelble et al., 2013). Multiple frameworks have been developed to quantify 
ecosystem services and broader dimensions of human well-being. Most suggest a number of 
domains (such as, economic and material well-being, social relations, health) and some have 
identified thousands of potential indicators (e.g., Breslow et al., 2016). Yet, in Hawaiʻi, there are 
few existing datasets that represent desired social outcomes, let alone enough to represent each 
domain. To frame our modeling effort, we examined the literature and identified five core 
domains of human well-being important in the region: Economic and Material Well-being, 
Health, Culture and Spirituality, Social Relations, Safety and Security (McKinnon et al., 2015; 
Breslow et al., 2016; Leong et al., 2019; Wongbusarakum et al., 2019). We then explored how 
themes related to these domains may be further grouped to encompass existing data and 
adequately represent important social concepts in Hawaiʻi. 
Identify specific social and economic objectives, indicators, and management scenarios 
To compile an initial list of socio-economic objectives, we reviewed mandates and strategy and 
policy-related documents of state and federal management agencies and NGOs (Supplementary 
information 1), as well as objectives that emerged from an Atlantis modeling workshop held in 
January 2017 (Weijerman, 2017). We particularly looked for objectives with the most overlap 
between sources, which we interpreted as an indication that they are common to multiple 
stakeholder groups. The objectives related to human well-being retrieved from the 
policy/strategy documents were in general at a high level with few or no specific goals. 
Therefore, a second workshop was conducted in May 2019 (Weijerman et al., 2019). In this 
workshop, 29 participants with diverse expertise (e.g. natural resource fisheries management, 
habitat management, community engagement, coral reef ecology, fisheries economics), were 
asked to identify social and economic objectives for each well-being domain (Economic and 
Material Well-being, Health, Culture and Spirituality, Social Relations, Safety and Security) that 
were directly related to the biophysical condition of the coral reef ecosystem. The authors then 
honed the list of objectives to those that are policy-relevant (i.e., match NOAA policy mandates), 
and with sufficient data to measure them. 
 
Workshop participants were also asked to suggest indicators that directly or indirectly measure 
the degree to which the identified objective was met. From this list the authors selected 
indicators that met the following criteria: 
1. Measured concepts identified in mandates or organization’s policy or strategy documents; 
2. Related to the marine resources and marine resource dependent communities; 
3. Can be linked to the input (e.g., fishing effort) or output (e.g., catch, biomass) of an end-to-
end ecosystem model; 
4. Existing, accessible data to quantify indicators. 
 
We then compared the resulting list of indicators with our conceptual SES framework to ensure 
consistency and examined the quality of existing datasets to ensure their accuracy, before 
finalizing the set of indicators to test in our quantitative model. In some cases, identifying 
relevant data for the indicators was straightforward (e.g., total fisheries value) but in other cases, 
we had to use a proxy indicator due to lack of data. In these cases, we used our best professional 
judgment about the relevance and appropriateness of proxies and existing data. An example is 
the biomass of culturally important species. Many studies, such as Friedlander et al. (2013), 
provide examples of species that are important in certain areas for certain purposes. However, to 
our knowledge there is not a systematically produced list of species considered “culturally 
important,” nor has there been a discussion of “culturally important to whom” or how to 
prioritize species important to different stakeholder groups. Compiling such a list is a research 
endeavor in itself. Economic importance is one aspect of culture, and can be used to generate a 
list of species for prioritization. Therefore, we selected “Biomass of culturally important species” 
to demonstrate how an indicator that focuses on select species could propagate throughout the 
model. 
 
At the 2019 workshop, participants discussed and selected linkages among ecosystem state 
components, ecosystem services, and human well-being domains that were deemed most 
threatened by current environmental and management regimes, and identified management 
mitigation scenarios to relieve/reduce the threat (Weijerman et al., 2019). From these identified 
scenarios, we selected management scenarios we could apply in the developed ecosystem model. 
Quantify social-ecological trade-offs using Ecopath with Ecosim 
Ecopath with Ecosim 
We developed an Ecopath (snapshot of the ecosystem structure) model (EwE version 
6.5.14040.0) with 55 functional groups and calibrated it for the Hawaiʻi nearshore ecosystem 
(Polovina, 1984; Walters et al., 1997; Supplementary information 2). With Ecosim (time 
dynamics), we forced the model with known climate change and fisheries impacts for the 
historical (or hindcast) simulation from 2000–2019 and with projected climate change and 
adapted fisheries scenarios for the 2020–2040 forecast simulation. For climate change, we 
included the two most recent coral-mortality events due to increased ocean temperatures (2014–
2015 and 2019) in the hindcast simulation. For the forecast simulation, we included the projected 
increase in temperature events in the next decade (2026 and 2029) and annual events occurring 
after 2032 (Van Hooidonk et al., 2014). For fisheries impact, we included two fisheries, a reef-
based fishery which was further split into four gear-specific fisheries and included both 
commercial and recreational data, and a deepwater-based fishery with one gear type and which 
was split into commercial and recreational fisheries. The reef-based fishery is a multispecies, 
multigear fishery with main gear types being spear, net, and hook and line. Approximately 5% of 
the total commercial catches were obtained through “other” fishing techniques (e.g., gleaning, 
traps) and were grouped together as one gear, “other”, for simplicity. Each gear type has a 
slightly different catch composition with spear fishers mostly targeting grazers and parrotfish, 
nets catching browsers, grazers and prey fish, hook and line fishers catching benthic carnivores, 
and other gear types invertebrates (Table S2.3 in Supplementary information 2). Since 
recreational catches are 3-10 times higher than commercial catches (Weijerman et al., 2013; 
McCoy et al., 2018) we report them as one gear-specific fishery. The deepwater-based fishery 
uses hook and line and targets seven deepwater bottomfish species which we have grouped in 
two functional groups (bottomfish feeding in water column, BFW; bottomfish feeding on 
bottom, BFB). The deepwater-based fishery is partly regulated by no-take Marine Protected 
Areas (MPAs) and the historical catches reflect this restriction. There is no recreational data 
present for the deepwater-based fishery but it is assumed that recreational catch is equal to 
commercial catch (Langseth et al., 2018).  
 
Historical recreational fishing data of the reef-based fishery came from the Ocean Tipping Point 
project (http://www.pacioos.hawaii.edu/projects/oceantippingpoints/#data) and McCoy et al. 
(2018) and included only finfish. Historical commercial fishing data, including both reef-based 
and deepwater-based fisheries, came from the Western Pacific Fisheries Information Network 
(https://www.fisheries.noaa.gov/resource/tool-app/western-pacific-fisheries-information-
network-data-portal). To create catch time series for Ecosim, we summarized these catch data by 
gear type, functional group, and year, and assumed that the recreational catches of “other” in the 
reef-based fishery and of the bottomfish functional groups in the deepwater-based fishery was 
equal to the commercial catches.  
 
Fishing can be simulated in Ecosim by (1) a time series of catches; (2) gear-specific fishing 
effort; and/or (3) species or functional group specific fishing mortality. For the historical 
simulation we used gear-specific annual catch time series. For the projections we used gear-
specific fishing effort and functional group specific fishing mortality in correspondence with the 
management scenarios. These simulations assume 100% compliance which in reality can be hard 
to enforce due to the nature of the multi-species fisheries employed. For example, in the “No 
Herbivore fishing” scenario, fishing mortality for the herbivorous groups was set to zero 
assuming that herbivores are not caught at all by any gear type. In practical terms, not catching 
any herbivores with a non-discriminatory net would mean that fishers would need to place their 
nets in areas where large schools of roaming herbivores are absent, e.g. on sandy areas, or they 
would need to actively monitor their nets and release any herbivores that get trapped. An 
example of the implementation of this scenario is the Kahekili Herbivore Fisheries Management 
Area on Maui, Hawai`i (Williams et al., 2016).  
Simulation of management scenarios 
Table 1 explains how we incorporated the scenarios in Ecosim.  
 
To explore the increased fishing pressure on species under the gear restrictive scenarios (the 
gear-limited reef-based fishery scenarios in Table 1), we also simulated those scenarios with 
effort displacement (Supplementary information 5). Results showed only slight differences in 
outputs (Supplementary information 5), thus we further focused on the scenarios mentioned 
above.  
Evaluate trade-offs 
To quantify the efficacy of management scenarios to reach the desired outcomes, we compared 
the biomass, catch, and the identified indicators at the start (2019) and end (2040) of the 
simulation. For indicators that required time series, we repeated the process for the time series of 
forecasted (2019–2040) simulations. To assess how much better or worse an alternative scenario 
was compared to the Constant Effort scenario, we quantified the relative change in the end value 
(2040) of each indicator between the alternative and the Constant Effort scenarios. 
RESULTS 
Social-ecological conceptual systems framework  
The developed conceptual SES framework provides the foundation for the relationships between 
system components and undergirds the quantitative modeling effort (Fig. 2). Management and 
climate change – the focus of EBFM and the scenarios we simulate – influence ecological state. 
The ecological state of the system directly influences the social state, which is grouped into three 
elements (Fig 2): economic benefits (e.g., economic livelihood), consumptive benefits (e.g., 
social connections), and non-consumptive benefits (e.g., recreation, existence value) ( Kittinger 
et al., 2015; Grafeld et al., 2017). The social state can influence how people engage with the 
ecosystem outside of marine management initiatives. Double-sided arrows between ecological 
state and the elements of social state indicate this reciprocal relationship often not included in 
SES models (Leong et al., 2019).  
 
In Hawaiʻi, consumptive use related to fishing feeds and supports the livelihoods of tens of 
millions of people a year (Bryant et al., 1999). It also has benefits to society in the domains of 
social relations (e.g., through sharing the catch), health (e.g., both physical and mental), and 
cultural well-being (e.g., continuation of traditional practices) (Breslow et al., 2016; Leong et al., 
2019). For example, in Hawaiʻi, approximately 1/3 of the residents identify themselves as fishers 
and place a high importance on fishing (OmniTrack Group, 2011). By tracing the fate of the 
caught seafood, a supply chain emerges (Grafeld et al., 2017) and social connections become 
apparent (Kittinger et al., 2015). Catch can be sold, shared, eaten at home, or used in 
cultural/social practices. The multi-dimensional social importance of fisheries is reflected in the 
fact that the nearshore non-commercial sector is larger than the nearshore commercial sector 
(McCoy et al., 2018). Indeed, the 2011 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, & Wildlife-
Associated Recreation identified 27 non-commercial fishers in Hawaiʻi for every licensed 
commercial fisher. As non-market benefits can far outweigh market returns to fisheries, impacts 
to non-commercial activities should be considered in management decisions alongside market-
based impacts (Finkbeiner et al., 2018). These important benefits are reflected in the conceptual 
framework by economic benefits and consumptive benefits (Fig. 2).   
Snorkeling and scuba diving are examples of non-consumptive activities that result in benefits, 
such as recreational opportunities (Cesar and Van Beukering, 2004). In one marine reserve well-
known for snorkeling in Hawaiʻi, Hanauma Bay, the entrance fee grossed nearly $6 million per 
year in revenue for the park’s management (Hawaiʻi News Now, 20141). For comparison, this 
value is the same magnitude as the total state commercial and non-commercial fisheries catches 
combined. People’s interest in recreation can also be demonstrated by strong visitation of high-
quality sites. For instance, the north shore of Kauaʻi is visited by approximately 2,000 visitors a 
day who swim and snorkel (Vaughan and Ardoin, 2014). A recent dive expenditure study 
conducted in Hawaiʻi (unpublished) indicated that divers strongly valued the presence of high 
live coral cover and fish populations that are abundant, diverse, and large in size. These results 
are similar to a dive preference study in Guam (Grafeld et al., 2016).  
Identification of objectives and indicators 
Our review of policy documents, workshop results, and available data resulted in three socio-
economic objectives and one ecological objective with in total ten associated indicators for 
which existing data sets or adequate proxies were available (Table 2). These indicators span all 
three elements of the social state (economic, consumptive and non-consumptive benefits). 
The social importance of fishing led us to select the indicators “Catch allocated for home 
consumption or shared within community” and “Biomass of culturally important functional 
groups” for the first objective (Maintain culturally appropriate food system) which corresponds 
to consumptive benefits in Figure 2. Also included in this category is variability of catch 
expressed as the coefficient of variation of the total catch (catch CV), which reflects the 
reliability and food security of marine resources. The second objective corresponds with non-
consumptive benefits in Figure 2. The dive enjoyment indicator was chosen because data exist 
on the importance of diving/snorkeling in Hawaiʻi (PIFSC unpublished survey). Monk seal and 
dolphin biomass was chosen to include the importance of rare wildlife (which could have non-
consumptive benefits from viewing or just knowing they exist (e.g., Kittinger et al., 2012)). The 
total fisheries value was included as an indicator for the third objective corresponding to 
                                                 
1 Available at: https://www.hawaiinewsnow.com/story/27521510/group-raises-concerns-over-hanauma-bay-money/. 
Accessed on April 6, 2020. 
economic benefits in Figure 2. The four ecological indicators for the fourth objective came from 
literature (Weijerman et al., 2013, 2018; Wongbusarakum et al., 2019). 
We then modified our conceptual SES framework (Fig. 2) to represent the identified measurable 
objectives and indicators in the final SES model (Fig. 3). Management actions (influenced by 
objectives [Table 2]) affect fishing effort (Fig. 3). The extraction of marine life (and climate 
change) leads to changed ecosystem state components that are important to divers thus 
influencing dive enjoyment, an important non-consumptive benefit of marine resources (Table 2, 
Objective 2). A change in fishing effort also likely changes the biomass of culturally important 
species (Objective 1). Additionally, the variability (and hence reliability), consumption, and 
sharing of catch are all indicators for maintaining food systems (Objective 1). A change in catch 
could lead to a change in revenue from the catch (Objective 3).  
Evaluating social-ecological trade-offs 
Management scenarios reduced catches and increased biomass of the groups for which they were 
intended, e.g., herbivores for the reef-based management scenarios and bottomfishes for the two 
MPA scenarios (Fig. 4). Despite a >50% reduction in Prey Fish catch relative to the Constant 
Effort scenario for the No Net and Line Only scenarios, Prey Fish biomass only increased by 
<10%, likely due to increased predation by apex predators. Invertebrate catches were >25% 
lower than the Constant Effort scenario for the Line Only and No Spearfishing scenarios, yet 
invertebrate biomass at the end of the simulation was similar across all management scenarios. 
Despite including the positive influences herbivores have on coral recovery through the 
mediation function (Supplementary information 2), coral biomass decreased due to temperature-
induced mortalities forced on all scenarios equally. The increased herbivores under the reef-
based management scenarios led to increased predation and thus 10–20% lower biomass relative 
to the Constant Effort scenario of coral and macroalgae (Fig. 4).  
There were clear trade-offs among the three socio-economic and the one ecological objectives in 
the forecast simulation (Fig. 5). When comparing the end status of the indicators across 
management scenarios relative to the Constant Effort scenario similar trade-offs became 
apparent (Fig. 6). The four reef-based fishery management scenarios performed better in all four 
of the ecological indicators associated with Objective 4 relative to the Constant Effort scenario 
(Fig. 6). However, in these scenarios there were relative decreases in total recreational catch (and 
thus, sharing of catch and home consumption; Fig. 3, Objective 1), intangible benefits (Objective 
2), and total revenue (Objective 3) compared to the Constant Effort scenario. Important to note is 
that even though recreational catches and revenue decreased under the reef-based fishery 
scenarios relative to Constant Effort, in absolute terms catches and revenue increased over the 
projected time period (Fig. 5). Coefficient of variation (CV) of the catch (Objective 1) was 
lowest for the reef-based fishery scenarios (Fig. 6). Targeted biomass, i.e., the biomass of 
culturally important species, increased over time only for the No Herbivore and Line Only 
scenarios, with the increase mostly attributed to reef browsers and parrotfishes which are highly 
targeted by net and spearfishing (Figs. in Supplementary information 6). Since turtles also 
compete for algae, turtle biomass decreased when herbivore biomass increased (Figs. in 
Supplementary information 5). Furthermore, the large decreases in dive enjoyment for these two 
scenarios were mostly attributed to lowered turtle biomass (Supplementary information 4).  
Increases in recreational catch and total revenue as well as the catch CV under the two MPA 
scenarios were similar to those under the Constant Effort scenario (Fig. 5). Decreases in targeted 
biomass, i.e. culturally important biomass, were mainly driven by decreases in bottomfish 
biomass (Fig. 4). Relative changes over time for many of the ecological indicators under the two 
MPA scenarios were similar to the Constant Effort scenario (Fig. 5) except for biomass of 
charismatic species and apex predators. The increases in these groups for the two MPA scenarios 
were sensitive to the assumptions made with regard to effort displacement post-MPA removal. 
Relative changes in biomass of charismatic species and apex predators were higher under the 
MPA1 scenario, where fishing mortality stayed constantly higher after opening the MPAs (i.e., 
fishers will keep catching higher levels of bottomfishes in the re-opened areas) compared to 
MPA2. This increase was mainly driven by dolphin biomass (Figs. in Supplementary 
information 6) and sharks to a lesser extent through bottomfish predation release on 
planktivorous micronekton (myctophids), a main prey source for dolphins.  
Discussion 
Our interdisciplinary approach identified relevant regional socio-economic objectives and 
relationships between people and the natural environment they rely on and influence. These 
aspects were dependent on the local context of human communities and their engagement with 
natural resources. Therefore, while our specific results are not globally transferable, the approach 
we laid out here can be applied to any region. This study demonstrated how an ecosystem model 
can assist managers in making informed decisions aligned with the main principles of EBFM.  
Clear social and ecological trade-offs were illustrated across management scenarios within this 
study. There were differences in outcomes among reef-based fishery management scenarios just 
based on restricting certain fishing gears or target fish groups. Line Only and No Herbivore 
fishing were most beneficial to the ecosystem productivity at the cost of diminished recreational 
catch and revenue relative to the Constant Effort scenario. These results are in line with a 
previous similar study for a small coastal area on the west coast of Hawaiʻi Island (Weijerman et 
al., 2018). The catch CVs for these two reef-based scenarios were more stable than other 
management scenarios, but intangible benefits (dive enjoyment) were lower due to tropho-
dynamic processes.  
MPA removal under the assumption of increased resultant fishing effort led to increases in catch 
and revenue in the next 20 years at a cost of lowered bottomfish biomass. Under both MPA 
scenarios, the increase in biomass of charismatic megafauna may increase intangible benefits for 
wildlife viewing but also increase direct and indirect interactions in other fisheries. While the 
bottomfish fishery in Hawaiʻi currently has no-take marine reserves, the assumptions we made 
about the post-MPA removal period with respect to fishing mortality, along with a lack of 
exploration of the sensitivity of those assumptions, bar any conclusions that are directly 
representative of bottomfish spatial management in Hawaiʻi. Rather, we provided herein 
different ways to address spatial management tactics within a spatially aggregated ecosystem 
model.  
Due to data limitations we were restricted to proxies for some of the indicators. For example, 
“Sustain marine revenues'' is currently just measured by “total revenue”. The indicators “fishery-
related employment”, “fishery profitability”, and “market access” could also be incorporated to 
get a more holistic view of the economic benefits (Symes and Phillipson, 2009). Other studies 
have identified important domains of human well-being and cultural ecosystem services for 
which data do not currently exist in our study area, such as sense of place and identity, equity, 
and justice (Breslow et al., 2016; Leong et al., 2019). Although our conceptual framework 
highlights the importance of reciprocal relationships between social and ecological state 
components, our ecosystem modeling results represent the one-way impacts of changes in 
ecological state components on the social state components due to model limitations and because 
these feedbacks are not yet quantified. Adding weightings to objectives and their associated 
indicators, when available, will improve the accuracy and relevance of ultimate trade-off 
decisions. 
Our approach illustrates how modeling can support and inform implementing EBFM via its six 
guiding principles (NOAA Fisheries, 2016). We (1) implemented ecosystem-level planning by 
exploring policy documents and organizing a stakeholder workshop to identify management 
objectives and indicators related to marine resources. Engaging managers and stakeholders in 
development of models helps build trust, identify practical issues and concerns, and improves 
credibility in modelling (Wondolleck and Yaffee, 2017; Gray et al., 2018). Through the use of a 
paired conceptual SES and ecosystem model, we (2) advanced our understanding of ecosystem 
processes by synthesizing both natural and social science principles to understand the complex 
system dynamics and cumulative impacts from anthropogenic stressors in order to (3) prioritize 
vulnerabilities and risks to ecosystems and their components. Additionally, having a calibrated 
end-to-end ecosystem model, we were able to (4) explore and address trade-offs within an 
ecosystem, as there are many interventions possible to reach a certain objective and some are 
likely to be more effective than others, thereby (5) incorporating ecosystem considerations into 
management advice. Lastly, the ability to make informed management decisions allows 
managers to be prepared for the likely time horizon of changes in social and natural state 
components to (6) maintain resilient ecosystems. In conclusion, this study shows the important 
role SES models can play to support the implementation of EBFM. It identifies data gaps, and 
despite the limited data available, the analysis gives a clear overview of the societal and 
ecological trade-offs of alternative management scenarios. 
 
References 
Ainsworth, C. H., and Pitcher, T. J. 2006. Modifying Kempton’s species diversity index for use 
with ecosystem simulation models. Ecological Indicators, 6: 623–630. 
Arkema, K. K., Abramson, S. C., and Dewsbury, B. M. 2006. Marine ecosystem-based 
management: from characterization to implementation. Frontiers in Ecology and the 
Environment, 4: 525–532. 
Benson, A. J., and Stephenson, R. L. 2018. Options for integrating ecological, economic, and 
social objectives in evaluation and management of fisheries. Fish and Fisheries, 19: 40–56. 
Birkeland, C. 2019. Global Status of Coral Reefs: In Combination, Disturbances and Stressors 
Become Ratchets. In World Seas: an Environmental Evaluation. Volume III: Ecological 
Issues and Environmental Impacts, second, pp. 35–56. Ed. by C. Sheppard. Elsevier 
Academic Press. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780128050521000024. 
Breslow, S. J., Sojka, B., Barnea, R., Basurto, X., Carothers, C., Charnley, S., Coulthard, S., et 
al. 2016. Conceptualizing and operationalizing human wellbeing for ecosystem assessment 
and management. Environmental Science and Policy, 66: 250–259. 
Bryant, D., Burke, L., McManus, J., Spalding, M., Hinrichsen, D., and Wilkinson, C. R. 1999. 
Reefs at risk: a map-based indicator of threats to the worlds coral reefs. DEFENDERS, 74: 
6–15. 
Cesar, H. S., and Van Beukering, P. J. 2004. Economic valuation of the coral reefs of Hawai`i . 
Pacific Science, 58: 231–242. 
Chan, H. L., and Pan, M. 2017. Economic and social characteristics of the Hawaii small boat 
fishery 2014. https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/14653. 
Christensen, V., and Walters, C. J. 2004. Ecopath with Ecosim: methods, capabilities and 
limitations. Ecological Modelling, 172: 109–139. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S030438000300365X (Accessed 23 
November 2015). 
Clark, J. S., Carpenter, S. R., Barber, M., Collins, S., Dobson, A., Foley, J. A., Lodge, D. M., et 
al. 2001. Ecological Forecasts: An Emerging Imperative. Science, 293: 657–660. 
http://science.sciencemag.org/content/293/5530/657.abstract. 
Cline, T. J., Schindler, D. E., and Hilborn, R. 2017. Fisheries portfolio diversification and 
turnover buffer Alaskan fishing communities from abrupt resource and market changes. 
Nature Communications, 8: 14042. https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms14042. 
Finkbeiner, E. M., Micheli, F., Bennett, N. J., Ayers, A. L., Le Cornu, E., and Doerr, A. N. 2018. 
Exploring trade-offs in climate change response in the context of Pacific Island fisheries. 
Marine Policy, 88: 359–364. 
Friedlander, A., Aeby, G., Balwani, S., Bowen, B., Brainard, R., Clark, A., Kenyon, J., et al. 
2008. The state of coral reef ecosystems of the Northwestern Hawaiian Islands. In The state 
of coral reef ecosystems of the United States and Pacific freely associated states: 2008, pp. 
263–306. Ed. by J. E. Waddell and A. M. Clarke. NOAA Technical Memorandum NOS 
NCCOS 73. NOAA/NCCOS Center for Coastal Monitoring and Assessment’s 
Biogeography Team, Silver Spring, MD. 
Friedlander, A. M., Shackeroff, J. M., and Kittinger, J. N. 2013. Customary marine resource 
knowledge and use in contemporary Hawai ‘i 1. Pacific Science, 67: 441–460. BioOne. 
Grafeld, S., Oleson, K., Barnes, M., Peng, M., Chan, C., and Weijerman, M. 2016. Divers’ 
willingness to pay for improved coral reef conditions in Guam: An untapped source of 
funding for management and conservation? Ecological Economics, 128: 202–213. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S092180091530241X. 
Grafeld, S., Oleson, K. L. L., Teneva, L., and Kittinger, J. N. 2017. Follow that fish : Uncovering 
the hidden blue economy in coral reef fisheries. PLoSOne, 12: e0182104. 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal. pone.0182104. 
Gray, S., Voinov, A., Paolisso, M., Jordan, R., Bendor, T., Bommel, P., Glynn, P., et al. 2018. 
Purpose, processes, partnerships, and products: Four Ps to advance participatory socio-
environmental modeling: Four. Ecological Applications, 28: 46–61. 
Grüss, A., Rose, K. A., Simons, J., Ainsworth, C. H., Babcock, E. A., Chagaris, D. D., De 
Mutsert, K., et al. 2017. Recommendations on the use of Ecosystem Modeling for 
Informing Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management and Restoration Outcomes in the Gulf 
of Mexico. Marine and Coastal Fisheries, 9: 281–295. 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/19425120.2017.1330786. 
Harvey, C. J., Kelble, C. R., and Schwing, F. B. 2017. Implementing ‘the IEA’: Using integrated 
ecosystem assessment frameworks, programs, and applications in support of 
operationalizing ecosystem-based management. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 74: 398–
405. 
Hospital, J., and Beavers, S. 2012. Economic and social characteristics of Guam’s small boat 
fisheries. Pacific Islands Fish. Sci. Cent., Natl. Mar. Fish. Serv., NOAA, Honolulu. 
Kelble, C. R., Loomis, D. K., Lovelace, S., Nuttle, W. K., Ortner, P. B., Fletcher, P., Cook, G. S., 
et al. 2013. The EBM-DPSER conceptual model: integrating ecosystem services into the 
DPSIR framework. PLoS ONE, 8: e70766. 
Kittinger, J. N., Bambico, T. M., Watson, T. K., and Glazier, E. W. 2012. Sociocultural 
significance of the endangered Hawaiian monk seal and the human dimensions of 
conservation planning. Endangered Species Research, 17: 139–156. 
Kittinger, J. N., Teneva, L. T., Koike, H., Stamoulis, K. A., Kittinger, D. S., Oleson, K. L. L., 
Conklin, E., et al. 2015. From Reef to Table: Social and Ecological Factors Affecting Coral 
Reef Fisheries, Artisanal Seafood Supply Chains, and Seafood Security. PLoS ONE, 10: 
e0123856. Public Library of Science. http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0123856. 
Langseth, B., Syslo, J., Yau, A., Kapur, M., and Brodziak, J. 2018. Stock assessment for the 
Main Hawaiian Islands Deep 7 bottomfish complex in 2018, with catch projections through 
2022. Honolulu, Hawai`i . 217 pp. 
Leong, K. M., Wongbusarakum, S., Ingram, R. J., Mawyer, A., and Poe, M. R. 2019. Improving 
Representation of Human Well-Being and Cultural Importance in Conceptualizing the West 
Hawai`i  Ecosystem. https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmars.2019.00231. 
Link, J. S., and Browman, H. I. 2017. Operationalizing and implementing ecosystem-based 
management. ICES Journal of Marine Science, 74: 379–381. 
McCoy, K. S., Williams, I. D., Friedlander, A. M., Hongguang, M., Teneva, L. T., and Kittinger, 
J. N. 2018. Estimating nearshore coral reef-associated fisheries production from the main 
Hawaiian Islands using commercial and non-commercial data. PLoS ONE: 1–13. 
McKinnon, M. C., Cheng, S. H., Garside, R., Masuda, Y. J., and Miller, D. C. 2015. Map the 
evidence. Nature, 528: 185–187. 
Mora, C., Aburto-Oropeza, O., Bocos, A. A., Ayotte, P. M., Banks, S., Bauman, A. G., Beger, 
M., et al. 2011. Global human footprint on the linkage between biodiversity and ecosystem 
functioning in reef fishes. PLoS Biology, 9: e1000606. 
Nadon, M. O., Buam, J. K., Williams, I. D., McPherson, J. M., Zgliczynski, B. J., Richards, B. 
L., Schroeder, R. E., et al. 2012. Re-creating missing population baselines for Pacific reef 
sharks. Conservation Biology, 26: 483–503. 
NOAA Fisheries. 2016. Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management Road Map, Policy 01-120. 50 
pp. https://www.st.nmfs.noaa.gov/Assets/ecosystems/ebfm/EBFM_Road_Map_final.pdf. 
OmniTrack Group. 2011. Hawai`i  Fish Trust 2011 Seafood Security Study. A report on project 
#5042. Honolulu, Hawai`i . 
Parrish, F. A., Howell, E. A., Antonelis, G. A., Iverson, S. J., Littnan, C. L., Parrish, J. D., and 
Polovina, J. J. 2012. Estimating the carrying capacity of French Frigate Shoals for the 
endangered Hawaiian monk seal using Ecopath with Ecosim. Marine Mammal Science: 1–
20. 
Pellowe, K. E., and Leslie, H. M. 2017. Seasonal variability shapes resilience of small-scale 
fisheries in Baja California Sur, Mexico. PLOS ONE, 12: e0182200. Public Library of 
Science. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0182200. 
Polovina, J. J. 1984. Model of a coral reef ecosystem. Coral Reefs, 3: 1–11. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/BF00306135. 
Symes, D., and Phillipson, J. 2009. Whatever became of social objectives in fisheries policy? 
Fisheries Research, 95: 1–5. 
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0165783608002270. 
Townsend, H., Aydin, K., Holsman, K., Harvey, C., Kaplan, I., Hazen, E., Woodworth-Jefcoats, 
P. A., et al. 2017. Report of the 4th National Ecosystem Modeling Workshop (NEMoW 4): 
Using Ecosystem Models to Evaluate Inevitable Trade-offs. NOAA Technical 
Memorandum NMFS-F/SPO-173. 87 pp. internal-
pdf://255.52.27.247/NEMOW4_TMSPO173.pdf%0Ahttp://spo.nmfs.noaa.gov/tm/. 
Townsend, H., Harvey, C. J., DeReynier, Y., Davis, D., Zador, S. G., Gaichas, S., Weijerman, 
M., et al. 2019. Progress on Implementing Ecosystem-Based Fisheries Management in the 
United States Through the Use of Ecosystem Models and Analysis. Frontiers in Marine 
Science, 6: 641. https://www.frontiersin.org/article/10.3389/fmars.2019.00641. 
Van Hooidonk, R., Maynard, J. A., Manzello, D., and Planes, S. 2014. Opposite latitudinal 
gradients in projected ocean acidification and bleaching impacts on coral reefs. Global 
Change Biology, 20. 
Vaughan, M. B., and Ardoin, N. M. 2014. The implications of differing tourist/resident 
perceptions for community-based resource management: a Hawaiian coastal resource area 
study. Journal of Sustainable Tourism, 22: 50–68. Routledge. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2013.802326. 
Walters, C., Christensen, V., and Pauly, D. 1997. Structuring dynamic models of exploited 
ecosystems from trophic mass-balance assessments. Reviews in Fish Biology and Fisheries, 
7: 139–172. http://dx.doi.org/10.1023/A:1018479526149. 
Weijerman, M., Fulton, E. A., and Parrish, F. A. 2013. Comparison of coral reef ecosystems 
along a fishing pressure gradient. PLoS ONE, 8: e63797. Public Library of Science. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1371%2Fjournal.pone.0063797. 
Weijerman, M., Grace-McCaskey, C., Grafeld, S. L. ., Kotowicz, D. M., Oleson, K. L. L., and 
van Putten, I. E. 2016. Towards an ecosystem-based approach of Guam’s coral reefs: The 
human dimension. Marine Policy, 63: 8–17. Elsevier. 
Weijerman, M. 2017. Report of the Hawaii Atlantis Ecosystem Model Planning Workshop held 
in January 2017 in Honolulu. https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/14439. 
Weijerman, M., Gove, J. M., Williams, I. D., Walsh, W. J., Minton, D., and Polovina, J. J. 2018. 
Evaluating management strategies to optimise coral reef ecosystem services. Journal of 
Applied Ecology, 55: 1823–1833. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.13105. 
Weijerman, M., Leong, K. M., and Wongbusarakum, S. 2019. Second Hawai’i Atlantis 
Ecosystem Model Planning Workshop: Where is the ‘S’ in EBFM? Honolulu, HI. 
https://repository.library.noaa.gov/view/noaa/21425. 
Williams, I. D., Walsh, W. J., Schroeder, R. E., Friedlander, A. M., Richards, B. L., and 
Stamoulis, K. A. 2008. Assessing the importance of fishing impacts on Hawaiian coral reef 
fish assemblages along regional-scale human population gradients. Environmental 
Conservation, 35: 261–272. 
Williams, I. D., Richards, B. M., Sandin, S. A., Baum, J. K., Schroeder, R. E., Nadon, M. O., 
Zgliczynski, B., et al. 2011. Differences in reef fish assemblages between populated and 
remote reefs spanning multiple archipelagos across the central and western Pacific. Journal 
of Marine Biology, 2011: Article ID 826234, 14 pages. 
Williams, I. D., Baum, J. K., Heenan, A., Hanson, K. M., Nadon, M. O., and Brainard, R. E. 
2015. Human, oceanographic and habitat drivers of central and western Pacific coral reef 
fish assemblages. PLoS ONE, 10: e0120516. 
Williams, I. D., White, D. J., Sparks, R. T., Lino, K. C., Zamzow, J. P., Kelly, E. L. A., and 
Ramey, H. L. 2016. Responses of Herbivorous Fishes and Benthos to 6 Years of Protection 
at the Kahekili Herbivore Fisheries Management Area, Maui. PLoS ONE, 11: e0159100. 
Wondolleck, J. M., and Yaffee, S. L. 2017. Marine ecosystem-based management in practice: 
different pathways, common lessons. Island Press. 
Wongbusarakum, S., Brown, V., Loerzel, A., Gorstein, M., Kleiber, D., Quinata, M., Iwane, M., 
et al. 2019. Achieving social and ecological goals of coastal management through integrated 
monitoring. Journal of Applied Ecology, 56: 2400–2409. John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.13494. 
 
Supplementary material  
The following supplementary information (SI) is available at ICESJMS online: 
SI 1. A table of human dimension related objectives from agencies classified by category 
SI 2. A description of the Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE) model development and validation 
SI 3. A description of the EwE model skill assessment 
SI 4. A description of the “Dive Enjoyment” indicator 
SI 5. Results of EwE simulations of the reef-based fishery management scenarios with effort 
displacement 
SI 6. Figures showing the percent change in biomass between end and start of the simulation 
across management scenarios for all functional groups 
Acknowledgements 
We are very grateful to Lansing Perng and Alohi Nakachi for fruitful discussions and to Jamie 
Barlow and Ryan Nichols for sharing their knowledge of the bottomfish (deepwater-based) 
fishery. We would also like to acknowledge the tremendous work of Supin Wongbusarakum for 
categorizing the objectives we gleaned from the strategy documents (Supplementary information 
1). We are very grateful to Amanda Dillon from Aline Design Hawaiʻi for the improvement of 
the figures and to three anonymous reviewers for improving the clarity of this manuscript. 
Funding for this work partially came from the NOAA Ocean Acidification Program. 
Data availability 
The data underlying this article are available in the article and in its online supplementary 
material. 