ISSN: 0074-0993

INTER-AMERICAN TROPICAL TUNA COMMISSION
COMISIÓN INTERAMERICANA DEL ATÚN TROPICAL

Bulletin—Boletín
Vol. 22, No. 3

A MODEL OF THE PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM IN THE
EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC OCEAN
UN MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO EN EL
OCÉANO PACÍFICO ORIENTAL TROPICAL

by—por

Robert J. Olson and—y George M. Watters

La Jolla, California
2003

The Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
(IATTC) operates under the authority and direction
of a convention originally entered into by Costa Rica
and the United States. The convention, which came
into force in 1950, is open to adherence by other
governments whose nationals fish for tropical tunas
in the eastern Pacific Ocean. Under this provision
Panama adhered in 1953, Ecuador in 1961, Mexico
in 1964, Canada in 1968, Japan in 1970, France and
Nicaragua in 1973, Vanuatu in 1990, Venezuela in
1992, El Salvador in 1997, Guatemala in 2000, Peru
in 2002, and Spain in 2003. Canada withdrew from
the Commission in 1984.
Additional information about the IATTC and its
publications can be found on the inside back cover
of this report.

La Comisión Interamericana del Atún Tropical
(CIAT) funciona bajo la autoridad y dirección de
una convención establecida originalmente por Costa
Rica y los Estados Unidos. La Convención, vigente
desde 1950, está abierta a la afiliación de otros gobiernos cuyos ciudadanos pescan atunes en el Océano
Pacífico oriental. Bajo esta estipulación, Panamá se
afilió en 1953, Ecuador en 1961, México en 1964,
Canadá en 1968, Japón en 1970, Francia y
Nicaragua en 1973, Vanuatu en 1990, Venezuela en
1991, El Salvador en 1997, Guatemala en 2000,
Perú en 2002, y España en 2003. Canadá se retiró
de la Comisión en 1984.
Información adicional sobre la CIAT y sus publicaciones puede ser encontrada en la parte interna
posterior de la cubierta de este informe.

COMMISSIONERS—COMISIONADOS
COSTA RICA
Ligia Castro
George Heigold
Asdrubal Vásquez
ECUADOR
Lucía Fernández de De Genna
Luis Torres Navarrete
EL SALVADOR
Manuel Calvo Benavides
Mario González Recinos
Jorge López Mendoza
José Emilio Suadi Hasbun
ESPAÑA—SPAIN
FRANCE—FRANCIA
Didier Ortolland
Daniel Silvestre
Sven-Erik Sjoden
Xavier Vant
GUATEMALA
Pablo Girón Muñóz
Fraterno Díaz Monge
JAPAN—JAPÓN
Katsuma Hanafusa
Yoshiaki Ito
Yamato Ueda

MÉXICO
María Teresa Bandala Medina
Guillermo Compeán Jiménez
Michel Dreyfus León
Jerónimo Ramos Sáenz-Pardo
NICARAGUA
Miguel A. Marenco Urcuyo
Sergio Martínez Casco
PANAMÁ
Arnulfo L. Franco Rodríguez
PERÚ
Leoncio Alvarez
Gladys Cárdenas
Alberto Hart
USA—EE.UU.
Scott Burns
Robert Fletcher
Rodney McGinnis
Patrick Rose
VANUATU
John Roosen
Anthony N. Tillett
Edward E. Weissman
VENEZUELA
Daniel Novoa Raffalli
Nancy Tablante

Director—Directór
Robin Allen
Headquarters and Main Laboratory—Oficina y Laboratorio Principal
8604 La Jolla Shores Drive
La Jolla, California 92037-1508, U.S.A.
www.iattc.org

INTER-AMERICAN TROPICAL TUNA COMMISSION
COMISIÓN INTERAMERICANA DEL ATÚN TROPICAL

Bulletin—Boletín
Vol. 22, No. 3

A MODEL OF THE PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM IN THE
EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC OCEAN
UN MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO EN EL
OCÉANO PACÍFICO ORIENTAL TROPICAL

by—por

Robert J. Olson and—y George M. Watters

La Jolla, California
2003

CONTENTS—INDICE
ENGLISH VERSION—VERSIÓN EN INGLES
Page
ABSTRACT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .135
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .135
ECOPATH WITH ECOSIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .136
THE ETP MODEL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .137
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .140
MODEL REVIEW . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .141
FITTING THE MODEL TO HISTORICAL DATA . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .144
DISCUSSION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .145
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .146
____________________
FIGURES—FIGURAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .148
____________________
TABLES—TABLAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .152
____________________
VERSIÓN EN ESPAÑOL—SPANISH VERSION
Página
RESUMEN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .189
INTRODUCCIÓN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .189
ECOPATH CON ECOSIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .190
EL MODELO DEL POT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .192
ANÁLISIS DE SENSIBILIDAD . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .194
REVISIÓN DEL MODELO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .196
AJUSTE DEL MODELO A DATOS HISTÓRICOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .199
DISCUSIÓN . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .200
RECONOCIMIENTOS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .201
____________________

REFERENCES—REFERENCIAS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .203
____________________
APPENDIX—ANEXO . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .211

A MODEL OF THE PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM IN THE
EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC OCEAN
by
Robert J. Olson and George M. Watters1
ABSTRACT
Recent calls for a more holistic approach to fisheries management have motivated development of trophic mass-balance models of ecosystems that underlie fisheries production. We developed a model hypothesis of the pelagic ecosystem in the eastern tropical Pacific Ocean (ETP) to
gain insight into the relationships among the various species in the system and to explore the ecological implications of alternative methods of harvesting tunas. We represented the biomasses of
and fluxes between the principal elements in the ecosystem with Ecopath, and examined the
ecosystem's dynamic, time-series behavior with Ecosim. We parameterized the model for 38
species or groups of species, and described the sources, justifications, assumptions, and revisions
of our estimates of the various parameters, diet relations, fisheries landings, and fisheries discards in the model. We conducted sensitivity analyses with an intermediate version of the model,
for both the Ecopath mass-balance and the dynamic trajectories predicted by Ecosim. The analysis showed that changes in the basic parameters for two components at middle trophic levels,
Cephalopods and Auxis spp., exert the greatest influence on the system. When the Cephalopod
Q/B and Auxis spp. P/B were altered from their initial values and the model was rebalanced, the
trends of the biomass trajectories predicted by Ecosim were not sensitive, but the scaling was sensitive for several components. We described the review process the model was subjected to, which
included reviews by the IATTC Purse-seine Bycatch Working Group and by a working group supported by the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis. We fitted the model to historical time series of catches per unit of effort and mortality rates for yellowfin and bigeye tunas
in simulations that incorporated historical fishing effort and a climate driver to represent the
effect of El Niño-Southern Oscillation-scale variation on the system. The model was designed to
evaluate the possible ecological implications of fishing for tunas in various ways. We recognize
that a model cannot possibly represent all the complexity of a pelagic ocean ecosystem, but we
believe that the ETP model provides insight into the structure and function of the pelagic ETP.
Key words: EASTERN TROPICAL PACIFIC, ECOPATH WITH ECOSIM, ECOSYSTEM MODELING, FOOD WEB, TUNA
INTRODUCTION
An ecosystem approach to fisheries management is important for maintaining sustainable fisheries and healthy ecosystems (FAO 1995, NRC 1999). Although the objectives of ecosystem-based management are difficult to define, a general awareness exists that modeling is an important tool for
exploring the ecological consequences of fishing and improving our knowledge of how ecosystems function. Although ecosystem models are not yet tools for fisheries management, they are complimentary
to single-species fisheries models in that they have the potential for predicting the unforeseen effects
of trophic interactions. Awareness of this has led to the development of multispecies trophic models
that explicitly incorporate the effects of fisheries exploitation on the system.
____________________
1 Present address: NOAA, Pacific Fisheries Environmental Laboratory, Pacific Grove, California, USA.

135

136

OLSON AND WATTERS

Open-ocean ecosystems are large, complex, and difficult to sample. The eastern tropical
Pacific Ocean (ETP) contains some of the most productive waters of the world's oceans (Barber
and Chavez 1986). The top levels of the pelagic food web comprise large tunas, dolphins, sharks,
billfishes, and other species. Many of these predators are targeted by, or are bycatches of, large
international fisheries. The data from these fisheries are the principal sources of information
about the pelagic ecosystem. However, fisheries data are not available for many of the non-target species (exceptions are recent data for large species, see Hall 1998). Scientific surveys are an
alternative for some species, but they are expensive, time-consuming, and impractical in the
pelagic open ocean.
The best strategy, at this time, for improving our understanding of the ecosystem is to
develop models that, based on the best available information, 1) represent the life histories of the
principal elements of the ecosystem, 2) describe, based on studies of diet and consumption rates,
how biomass flows among them, and 3) represent the size and species composition of the catches
of the various fisheries. The models should be capable of providing answers to “what if” questions
about the possible outcomes of alternative fishing policies. If modeling indicates that certain
species or groups of species are more sensitive than others to the ecological effects of fishing (i.e.
substantial biomass changes of non-target species resulting from a change in fishing rate), then
future studies, including assessments and monitoring, could be focused on those species or groups.
At its 58th meeting, in June 1997, the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC)
established the Working Group on Bycatch to examine the issue of bycatches and discards of all
species taken in the purse-seine fishery for tunas in the eastern Pacific Ocean. One of the terms
of reference for the Working Group was “to define the relationships among bycatch and target
species with special reference to the sustainability of the catches of all such species.” This was
the initial impetus for developing an ecosystem model for the ETP. Our objective was to develop
an hypothetical description of the ecosystem in pelagic waters of the ETP.
ECOPATH WITH ECOSIM
The ecosystem model of the pelagic ETP was developed using Ecopath with Ecosim (EwE)
(Walters et al. 1997, Christensen et al. 2000, Walters et al. 2000). EwE has been used to develop
many ecosystem models in the Pacific Ocean and elsewhere (e.g. Christensen and Pauly 1993).
Ecopath provides a framework for the construction of mass-balance models of ecosystems. The
mass-balance is generated from estimates of how abundant the resources are (biomasses), the
productivity or mortality rates of the resources, how they interact (diet compositions and food
consumption rates), and how efficiently the resources are utilized in the ecosystem. Given the
description of the ecosystem in Ecopath, its dynamic, time-series behavior is examined using Ecosim.
In Ecopath, the energy input and output of all model components must balance, so that
consumption = production + respiration + unassimilated food.

(1)

The production (P) of each component i is the sum of the catches (Y), predation mortality (M2),
biomass accumulation (BA), net migration (E), and other mortality (MO),
.

(2)

Bi is the biomass of component i, MOi = Pi(1 - EEi), where EEi is the ecotrophic efficiency. EE
is defined as the proportion of the annual production that is consumed or harvested within
the system.

137

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

Equation (2) can be re-expressed as:
,

(3)

where P/B i is the production/biomass ratio, Q/B i is the consumption/biomass ratio, and
DCij is the fraction of prey i in the average diet of predator j.
In Ecosim, the biomass dynamics of all ecosystem components that occupy trophic levels
higher than 1.0 are determined by
.

(4)

The change in biomass of component i (Bi) per unit time (t) equals biomass accumulation less three
types of losses. Biomass accumulation is the sum of the predation by component i on its prey
(indexed by j) multiplied by the gross efficiency gi of component i. The function cji(Bi,Bj) predicts
the consumption of component j by component i from their respective biomasses (see Walters et al.
1997 for the details on this function). Losses are from nonpredation natural mortality (M i ),
fishing mortality (Fi), and the consumption of component i by its predators.
In Ecosim, the biomass of component i that is vulnerable to predation by component j (Vij)
is a function of a vulnerability rate (v).
,

(5)

where aij is the effective rate at which predator j searches for prey i. The vulnerable biomass
increases from exchange with a pool of invulnerable biomass, v(Bi - Vij), and decreases when prey
return to the invulnerable condition (vVij) or by predation (aijVijBj). When v is small, the flows
between predators and prey are controlled mostly by variations in prey biomass, i.e. control is bottom-up. When v is large, these flows are controlled mostly by variations in predator biomass, i.e. control is top-down. We estimated one vulnerability rate for all predator-prey links in the model.
EwE requires the following input parameters for each ecosystem component: B, P/B, Q/B,
EE, assimilation efficiency, diet composition, retained catches (called landings in EwE), discarded
catches (called discards in EwE), and ontogenetic transition parameters for groups comprised of
split pools (e.g. Small marlins and Large marlins). Ontogenetic transition parameters govern the
transition from small to large components; these are parameters such as the growth rate and the
age when the transition occurs. Of the first four parameters listed in this paragraph, either B or
EE can be left as an unknown (for each component) and estimated by solving the set of simultaneous
linear equations in Ecopath (equation 3).
Scope

THE ETP MODEL

Our model of the pelagic ecosystem in the ETP covers the area circumscribed by 20°N,
20°S, 150°W, and the approximate boundary of the shelf break along the coast of the Americas,
approximately 32.8 million km2. We assumed that immigration to this region is balanced by emigration out of the region. We averaged the parameter estimates for the 1993-1997 period whenever possible. We used units of tons·million km−2 and yearly rates.
Our final version of the model (ETP7) had 38 components (Table 1a). We chose the
model components to include the principal exploited species (e.g. tunas and marlins), functional
groups (e.g. sharks and cephalopods), sensitive species (e.g. sea turtles and dolphins), and a
species that resides in the system for only part of the year (Pacific bluefin tuna). Some taxa were
segregated into ontogenetic components for two reasons. First, the species that become very

138

OLSON AND WATTERS

large as adults undergo considerable trophic ontogeny, and their prey encompass several components of the model during their life history. Second, many of these taxa are caught by different
fishing gears at different sizes. We separated some taxa into two ontogenetic components
according to the size ranges in Table 1a. Other taxa also undergo trophic ontogeny during development, but we represented them by only one component due to a lack of data.
In defining the model components, we took several factors into account. The taxonomic
scale of the available information often influenced which taxa we grouped into model components.
The information included basic differences in the biology and habitat of the animals. For example, species and functional groups were separated based on whether they occupy epipelagic versus
mesopelagic habitats; some of the predators (e.g. yellowfin tuna) specialize on epipelagic prey and
others (e.g. bigeye tuna) on mesopelagic prey. Little information was available for some taxa, and
we chose to lump similar taxa into functional groups (e.g. Cephalopods and Miscellaneous epipelagic fishes).
Parameters
We based our estimates of the input parameters for each model component (Tables 2a and
3a) on a variety of sources (Table 4a). We utilized published values whenever possible. We also
employed unpublished data and reports for estimates of diet composition, B, Q/B, retained catches, and discards. We fitted regression trees (Breiman et al. 1984) to data from a food habits study
to account for temporal and spatial variability in the diet compositions of certain predators. We
used stock assessments for estimates of B and P/B (assuming P/B = Z), and analyzed fisheries
data to obtain other estimates of P/B, ontogenetic parameters, retained catches, and discards. For
some components, we assigned EE’s based on our assumptions of the relative magnitude of F versus M. If F was assumed to be low relative to M, we assigned a low EE. If F was assumed to be
about equal to M, we assumed EE = 0.5. If F was assumed to be high relative to M, we assigned
a high EE. Thus, we assumed that EE (defined as the fraction of production used within the system) depends largely on fishing mortality. We multiplied abundance estimates from line-transect
surveys by estimates of mean weight to obtain some estimates of B (e.g. Toothed whales and
Spotted and Mesopelagic dolphins). Assuming purse-seine catchability is strictly size-specific, we
used size-specific catchability coefficients for yellowfin tuna to scale catches per unit of effort
(CPUEs) and thereby estimate B for various bycatch species by set type. We used the meta-analysis
of Pauly (1980) to obtain estimates of P/B for several components. We also made a variety of
other assumptions to derive estimates for parameters about which information was lacking.
These assumptions typically took the form of applying information from one component to another component for which that information is lacking (e.g. adjusting estimates of Q/B from bioenergetics studies of yellowfin tuna for application to bigeye tuna). We summarize the sources, justifications, and assumptions for our initial and revised estimates of B, P/B, Q/B, EE, and diet composition in Table 4a. We note that there is large uncertainty associated with the parameters for
many of the components. We attempted to identify the parameters and components for which we
had the least reliable information (Appendix Tables 1a and 2a, footnotes), and evaluated the sensitivity of the model to parameter uncertainty.
We calculated the amount of unassimilated food for each predator component (U/Q, Table
2a) based on the proximate composition of their prey. We obtained the proximate composition of
the prey taxa from Sidwell (1981) and Bykov et al. (2000). Phillips (1969) presented mean
digestibilities of dietary protein, fat, and carbohydrate (0.9, 0.85, and 0.4 respectively). For protein, we also subtracted a portion for nitrogenous excretion (Brett and Groves 1979), resulting in
an overall adjustment of 0.7. We calculated the available portions of protein, fat, and carbohydrate in the prey as the digestibility of each multiplied by the proportion (by wet weight) of each

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

139

in each prey component. We calculated U/Q for most prey components as the sum of the unavailable portions (1 − available) of protein, fat, and carbohydrate, adjusted to 100 percent. We
assigned the unavailable portion of zooplankton prey based on information of Shannon and
Jarre-Teichmann (1999), and that of phytoplankton and available detritus based on information
from Valiela (1984). U/Q for each predator component was the sum of the unavailable portions
of their prey weighted by the proportions of each prey component in the diet.
We estimated fishery landings and discards, averaged over 1993-1997, for each model component by fishing gear (purse seine, longline, and pole-and-line) and fishing mode (sets on tunas
associated with dolphins, sets on tunas associated with floating-objects, and sets on unassociated
tunas by purse seiners) (Tables 5a and 6a) (see Hall (1998) for a discussion of fishing methods in
the eastern Pacific Ocean tuna fishery). We obtained the catch data from IATTC databases.
Small, localized coastal, artisanal, and recreational fisheries were not included in the model due
to a shortage of data.
Ontogenetic transition parameters are required for the taxa that are separated into two
ontogenetic components, or split pools (Table 7a). These include life-history information from
growth functions, weight-length relationships, reproductive parameters, and recruitment parameters. We summarize the sources, justifications, and assumptions for our initial and revised estimates of these parameters in Table 8a. Note that default values are used for the parameters
describing the minimum and maximum relative time the animals may spend in the small components. We used these values because, according to Christensen et al. (2000), Ecosim simulations
are very sensitive to this parameter and the default values are recommended. Similarly, 0.8 is
recommended by Christensen et al. (2000) for the proportion of increase in food intake used for
growth. We estimated all other ontogenetic transition parameters for each component with split
pools (Tables 7a and 8a). We used growth models to make the initial estimates of the minimum
and maximum relative time the animals may spend in the small stages (references in Table 8a,
estimates in Appendix Table 3).
In Ecosim, we used the default values for the following “Group information” parameters.
These included “Maximum relative P/B” (2.0), “Maximum relative feeding time” (2.0), “Feeding
time adjust rate” (0.5), “Predator effect on feeding time” (0.0), “Density-dependent catchability”
(1.0), and “Qbmax/Qbo (for handling time)” (1000). For the “Fraction of ‘other’ mortality sensitive
to changes in feeding time,” we used 0.0 for components comprised of large individuals and apex
predators, 0.5 for medium-size fishes that are eaten by the upper-level predators, and 1.0 for the
small prey components.
Balancing the model
Our initial set of parameter estimates (ETP1; Appendix Tables 1a and 2a) did not produce
a balanced model in Ecopath. In the unbalanced model, the estimated predation on some components was greater than the estimated production of those components. This was caused by
overestimated consumption rates and/or biomasses of the predators, underestimated production
rates and/or biomasses of the prey, or unreliable diet data. We made adjustments to several
parameters and components, depending on our relative confidence in the initial parameter estimates. Our confidence ratings were subjective and based on assessments of data quality, the
number and tenability of assumptions, etc. Parameter estimates of low confidence (Appendix
Tables 1a and 2a) were adjusted more often and to a greater degree than those of medium confidence. Whenever possible, we did not adjust parameters in which we had relatively high confidence. We also had difficulties balancing the first draft of the model because cannibalism estimates within some components were excessive relative to their own production rates. In ETP1 (Appendix),
cannibalism was problematic in the two cephalopod components and in the Zooplankton component.

140

OLSON AND WATTERS

We solved this problem by aggregating the Epipelagic and Mesopelagic cephalopods into one
Cephalopod component, and disaggregating the Zooplankton component into two zooplankton
components based on size and feeding habits.
After balancing ETP1, we made additional changes to ETP2. We removed Large and Small
wahoo from the Large and Small miscellaneous piscivores because wahoo are consumed by different predators than are the carangids and other small pelagic fishes. We then combined the
Large and Small miscellaneous piscivores into one component. We omitted Anchovies as a component and combined them with the Miscellaneous epipelagic fishes because they are eaten in
only a small part of the ETP, and balancing their consumption requirements incorrectly implied
excessively high production rates of zooplankton throughout the system. In some cases, we
removed an unreliable biomass estimate and replaced it by an estimate of EE. These and subsequent revisions took the model through the most recent version, ETP7, which is described in
Tables 2a and 3a.
We summarize the principal adjustments in the model parameters required to balance the
model in Table 4a (see those marked with footnote 3). Our adjustments to the diet matrix can be
viewed by comparing Table 3a and Appendix Table 2a.
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
The model is one of several possible hypotheses describing the pelagic ecosystem in the ETP.
Much of the information synthesized in this model is uncertain (see footnotes in Appendix Tables
1a and 2a). We considered the sensitivity of an intermediate version of the model (ETP5), both
for the Ecopath mass-balance and the dynamic trajectories predicted by Ecosim. First, we varied
the basic input parameters B, P/B, Q/B, and EE by -50% and +50% (in steps of 10%) for each component and calculated the resulting percent change in each of the input parameters that are computed by Ecopath (Table 2a, footnote 1) for all other components. We summarized the results of
this analysis with a sensitivity index (Figure 1). The index is the count of the parameters affected by ±30% or more for each component.
The Ecopath mass-balance was relatively insensitive to parameter values for most components (Figure 1). Varying the parameters for four components occupying top trophic levels (Large
and Small marlins, Small sharks, and Toothed whales), one component in the middle (Skipjack
tuna), and three components near the bottom of the food web (Primary consumers, Secondary
consumers, and Miscellaneous epipelagic fishes) indicated low-medium model sensitivity. Model
sensitivity was zero for the Baleen whales.
The initial sensitivity analysis showed that changes in the parameters of two components,
Cephalopods and Auxis spp., exert the greatest influence on the system (Figure 1). These components occupy middle trophic levels, and many of the upper-level predators prey on these components. Little is known about Auxis spp. and about the many species of cephalopods in the ETP,
and studies of these two groups might be the most efficient way to improve our knowledge of the
ETP ecosystem.
Because the Ecopath mass-balance was most sensitive to parameters for Cephalopods and
Auxis spp., we concentrated the second part of the sensitivity analysis on these two components.
We evaluated the sensitivity of the biomass trajectories predicted by Ecosim to changes in the basic
parameters for these components in ETP5. We changed P/B, Q/B, and EE for the Cephalopods and
Auxis spp. by 20%, 30%, and 50%, and evaluated the fits of the predicted biomasses to CPUE data
for yellowfin tuna (Figure 31 from IATTC 1999a). Reductions in the sum of squares (SS) of the
fits, indicating an improvement over the initial values, occurred in only a few cases (Table 9). SS
improvements were slight, and in most cases the fits were worse. For the Cephalopods, 5 of the
14 fits showed negative changes in SS relative to the fits using the initial values, but the maximum

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

141

improvement in SS was only 3.3%. Positive changes in SS values, indicating a worse fit, were as
great as 69.7%. For Auxis spp., none of the parameter variations produced a better fit to the
CPUE data for yellowfin (Table 9).
For illustrative purposes, we analyzed how the sensitivities in the Ecopath mass-balance translate into changes in the biomass trajectories predicted by simulations described in the section entitled
FITTING THE MODEL TO HISTORICAL DATA. Because both the Ecopath mass-balance and
the Ecosim fits to the CPUE data were highly sensitive to changes in the Q/B of the Cephalopods
and the P/B of Auxis spp. (Figure 1, Table 9), we made those sorts of changes, one-by-one, to the
basic parameters in Ecopath and rebalanced each time. Then, in Ecosim, we repeated simulations
for the base ETP5 model, for ETP5 with altered Cephalopod Q/B, and for ETP5 with altered
Auxis spp. P/B, and compared the results. We changed the Q/B of the Cephalopods by a factor of
0.4 (new Q/B = 9.8) and the P/B of Auxis spp. by a factor of -0.4 (new P/B = 1.5) in the latter two
simulations. We plotted the predicted biomass trajectories for 13 model components that have
strong trophic linkages to the Cephalopods and Auxis spp. for a subset of the three simulations,
i.e. for 1960-1998. We found that predictions of absolute biomasses varied markedly among the
three simulations (Figure 2, lower two panels, trend lines greater than 1.0), but predicted trends
in biomass were not sensitive to the altered Q/B and P/B values (Figure 2, lower two panels,
straight or nearly-straight trend lines).
MODEL REVIEW
Our final model (ETP7) is a product of extensive review by a large number of scientists (see
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS). Two working groups were formed specifically for developing and
evaluating the model. The first, formed under a project entitled “Ecological Implications of
Alternative Fishing Strategies for Apex Predators” to develop and evaluate our model of the ETP,
was funded by the National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS) in Santa
Barbara, California (www.nceas.ucsb.edu). In addition, the IATTC Working Group on Bycatch
agreed, during its first meeting in July 1998, that Ecopath with Ecosim provides a useful starting
point for modeling ecosystem dynamics in the ETP, and established a subgroup, Ecological Studies
and Modeling (ESM), to oversee and review our model.
The goal of the first meeting of the NCEAS working group, held in November 1998, was to
revise and balance the first draft of the model. Considerable improvements to ETP1 (Appendix)
were made at that time, and the resulting model was named ETP2. Revisions of the model components and adjustments to the parameter values were made to achieve mass balance (see
Balancing the model). The NCEAS working group held four additional meetings during which
ETP2 was evaluated, revised, and ultimately used for analyses of the ecosystem.
At a meeting of the ESM subgroup in April 1999, the participants discussed the assortment
of information required to construct steady-state and dynamic models of the ecosystem. The subgroup also discussed other modeling approaches, including the model of Andersen and Ursin
(1977), multispecies virtual population analysis (MSVPA) (e.g. Pope 1979), mixed-species yieldper-recruit analysis (e.g. Murawski 1984), individual-based models (IBM) (e.g. Tyler and Rose
1994), and artificial life tools (e.g. Dagorn et al. 2000). The first balanced version of the ETP
model, ETP2, was reviewed at this meeting, and recommendations for the model's improvement
and further analyses were made. We acted on several of the recommendations during the subsequent year.
The recommendations of the ESM subgroup were summarized in two categories: 1) shortterm priorities for revising and calibrating ETP2, and 2) long-term modeling recommendations
(IATTC 1999b). We addressed all of the following short-term recommendations, except the last
item, during the subsequent year.

142

OLSON AND WATTERS

Add components for swordfish, bluefin tuna, albacore tuna, and baleen whales (if it
could be determined that these whales feed substantially in the tropics).
z Redefine the model area, considering, for example, ocean provinces or the main area of
the surface fishery.
z Conduct a particle-size spectrum analysis of the ETP ecosystem as an alternative
method of estimating biomasses.
z Compare top-down and bottom-up interactions in the model, to evaluate the relative
importance of environmental forcing in the ETP ecosystem.
z Compare previous estimates of the variability of yellowfin tuna recruitment in the EPO
with those produced by the model.
z Conduct a sensitivity analysis of the Ecosim output.
z Incorporate recently-available bycatch data for the longline fishery.
z Compare the ETP model with a model of a shorter food chain, such as that in the
Peruvian upwelling system.
The following sections summarize how we addressed the short-term recommendations. In
making these revisions, and also incorporating suggestions from the NCEAS working group
(which continued to meet during 1999-2000), ETP2 eventually became ETP7, the final model presented in this report.
z

Additional model components
We added Large and Small swordfish, Bluefin tuna, Baleen whales, and Albacore to the
model, separated the Producers into two components, and restructured the two zooplankton components. Our sources of information and assumptions for these are summarized in Table 4a.
We did not include swordfish (Xiphias gladius) in the first draft of the model because we
considered them to occur primarily in temperate waters, and to be a minor component of the ETP
ecosystem. Based on a more thorough literature review, however, we included two size-specific
components of swordfish in the model.
We did not include Pacific bluefin tuna (Thunnus orientalis) in the first draft of the model
because their distribution in the eastern Pacific is primarily in temperate waters, and they are a
minor component of the ETP ecosystem. Based on a more thorough review of the literature, however, we included one component of Bluefin in the model. Tagging data (Bayliff 1994) have shown
that many bluefin make a trans-Pacific migration from the western to the eastern Pacific Ocean
when young. We used the tagging data to estimate that ecological interactions with bluefin occur
in only 7% of the model area, and assumed they are resident in this region during four months of
the year.
We did not include baleen whales in the first draft of the model because we assumed that
most species of baleen whales do not feed in tropical regions of the ETP. There are, however, resident blue whales (Balaenoptera musculus) near the Costa Rica Dome. Blue whales also reside
seasonally in the Gulf of California, and are known to feed there. Bryde’s whales (B. edeni) are
also resident in coastal areas of the ETP. All other baleen whales that occur in the ETP, e.g. finback (B. physalus), sei (B. borealis), and humpback whales (Megaptera novaeangliae), do not feed
in the tropics. We added a component called Baleen whales, comprised of blue and Bryde's whales.
(The above information on whales was provided by S. Reilly (U.S. National Marine Fisheries
Service, La Jolla, California, USA) and M. Scott (IATTC, La Jolla, California, USA.)
We did not include albacore tuna (Thunnus alalunga) in the first draft of the model because
we considered only northern albacore, which do not often occur in the modeling area. However,
considerable amounts of southern albacore are caught in the modeling area by the Japanese,
Taiwanese, and Pacific Island longline fleets (Uosaki and Bayliff 1999, Hampton and Fournier
2000), so we added a model component called Albacore to represent southern albacore tuna. The
catch data were taken from Lawson (2001).

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

143

Redefining the model area
We determined that redefining the model area to more closely approximate the surface fishery of the eastern Pacific Ocean would not be a useful change. Reducing the model area would
eliminate some of the catches of the longline fleet. Enlarging the model area would add temperate animals that do not occur in most of the ETP. Many of the tropical species occurring relatively
close to the coast north of 20°N are already represented in the model. These include red crabs,
swordfish, tunas (including bluefin), billfishes, sharks, and marine mammals. We did not redraw
the northern boundary of the model at a higher latitude, however, because north of 20°N some
temperate and tropical species overlap during part of the year. The model best characterizes the
tropical ecosystem south of 20°N.
Partitioning the model into several smaller models that correspond to ocean provinces (e.g.
Longhurst 1998), would create a problem in adequately representing animals that are mobile.
Several of the species and functional groups move among ocean provinces, but we had no information on the amount of time these animals spend nor the amount of energy they consume in
each province.
Particle-size spectrum
The ESM subgroup suggested that a particle-size spectrum analysis (Pratt and Casey 1983,
Rodriguez and Mullin 1986, Boudreau and Dickie 1992) for the ETP might be helpful for calibrating our biomass estimates and estimating biomasses of some of the lesser-known components.
We conducted such an analysis, but found the results equivocal for the model because of uncertainty in independent estimates of phytoplankton and bacteria biomass for the ETP. We, therefore, made no changes based on the particle-size-spectrum relationship.
Environmental forcing
The members of the NCEAS working group explored how climate variation at the scale of
the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (ENSO) might affect animals at middle and upper trophic levels in the ETP. The working group used the ETP model to simulate the effects of single climateanomaly pulses, regular climate cycles, and greenhouse warming. First, they established an
empirical relationship between sea-surface temperature (SST) anomalies in the NIÑO3 region2
of the ETP and surface chlorophyll concentrations to simulate the bottom-up effects of physically forcing the biomass of the Large phytoplankton. They also developed an alternative hypothesis that physical forcing, in addition to affecting Large-phytoplankton biomass, simultaneously
affects egg production by predators and the degree to which recruiting predators are themselves
vulnerable to predation. Watters et al. (in press) summarize the results and conclusions of that work.
Comparisons with IATTC stock assessments of yellowfin tuna
ETP7 predicts biomass trends for yellowfin tuna that approximately agree with IATTC
stock assessments. We incorporated historical fishing effort and CPUE data for yellowfin, SST
anomalies, and hypothesized temperature effects on egg and larval production for yellowfin in a
simulation to see if the model could reproduce the biomass trends estimated in IATTC stock
assessments. The simulated biomass trajectory of Large and Small yellowfin tuna resembled the
pattern of CPUEs by Class-6 purse seiners (vessels with fish-carrying capacities of more than 425
____________________
2 The NIÑO3 region of the eastern equatorial Pacific is defined by the U.S. National Weather Service’s Climate Prediction
Center (CPC) as the area bounded by 5°N-5°S, 150°-90°W. Monthly mean SST anomalies are provided by the CPC on its
website, http://www.cpc.noaa.gov.

144

OLSON AND WATTERS

cubic meters) depicted in IATTC (1999a: Figure 31). Details on this and further analyses are in
the section entitled FITTING THE MODEL TO HISTORICAL DATA.
Ecosim sensitivity
At the meeting of the ESM subgroup, we presented the results of a sensitivity analysis of
the Ecopath portion of the model. Subsequent to that, we evaluated the sensitivity of the Ecosim
trajectories to changes in the basic parameters for the Cephalopods and Auxis spp. components.
The results are outlined above in the section entitled SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS.
Longline bycatch data
We incorporated more-recent data, supplied by H. Nakano (National Research Institute of
Far Seas Fisheries, Shimizu, Japan), on the bycatches of sharks by the Japanese longline fleet.
We multiplied the numbers of sharks caught per year by estimates of average weights of longlinecaught sharks adapted from Bailey et al. (1996) to obtain estimates of shark landings and discards. We determined which sharks were classified as large and small, and which were landed
and discarded, from information in Nakano et al. (1997).
Revision of plankton components
A reviewer of ETP5 encouraged us to substantially revise the Phytoplankton and
Zooplankton components in the model. Chai et al. (2002) used a nutrient-phytoplankton-zooplankton-detritus model to produce estimates of biomass and production of two phytoplankton
and two zooplankton groups in the eastern equatorial Pacific. The model is based on nitrogen
and silicate cycling forced by a three-dimensional circulation model for 5°N-5°S, 90°W-180°. They
found that their results were similar to those from observations in the field (e.g. Landry et al.
1995, Barber et al. 1996, Dugdale and Wilkerson 1998). Although we were encouraged to restructure the lower trophic levels of our model based on Chai et al.’s (2002) characterization of the
equatorial upwelling system, we recognize that this model does not fully represent the primary
and secondary production in the entire pelagic ETP.
We designated new model components for Small producers, Large phytoplankton,
Microzooplankton, and Mesozooplankton. The taxonomic composition of those groups (M.
Ohman, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, California, USA, personal communication)
is provided in Table 1a. We adopted Chai et al.’s (2002) estimates of P/B, and derived estimates
of EE from their model. We derived the EEs by dividing the flow into each component by the flow
out of each component and adjusting for the proportions of NH4, detrital nitrogen, and detrital
silicate that are recycled in the ecosystem. Our biomass estimates for the four plankton components (Table 2a) are lower than Chai et al.’s biomass estimates, but this result seems justified
because our model averages over areas that are not as productive as the equatorial upwelling system described by Chai et al. (2002).
FITTING THE MODEL TO HISTORICAL DATA
We fitted the model to time series data on yellowfin and bigeye tunas. We set up initial conditions for the fit by simulating a 51-year period with no fishing effort, and then used an historical series (1961-1998) of fishing effort for each of the five gears and fishing modes in the model
to drive fishing mortality. Running the simulation for 51 years without fishing allowed the
biomasses of the model groups to achieve equilibrium at higher levels, possibly approaching unexploited or early-exploited conditions. We standardized estimates of fishing effort (days fishing for

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

145

three purse-seine set types and for pole-and-line; numbers of hooks for longline) from 1961-1998
to the effort in 1993 (Figure 3). We also used the empirical climate driver for Large phytoplankton, described in the Environmental forcing section, to include the effects of climate variation
in the simulation.
We fitted the ecosystem model to estimates of relative biomass and average total mortality
rates for Large and Small yellowfin (Figure 3) and Large and Small bigeye (Figure 4). These
biomass and mortality estimates were taken from the stock assessments of Maunder and Watters
(2001) and Watters and Maunder (2001). For Large yellowfin, we used the biomass estimate at
the start of each year for fish in the seventh quarter or more after recruitment to the fisheries.
For Large bigeye, we used the biomass estimate at the start of each year for fish in the ninth quarter or more after recruitment to the fisheries. For Small yellowfin and Small bigeye, we subtracted the biomass estimates for the large fish from estimates of total biomass. All biomass estimates were scaled to biomasses in 1993 and treated as CPUEs. Fitting entailed iteratively adjusting the vulnerability rate (v, equation (5)) for all predator-prey links in the model to minimize the
sum of square errors (SS). When estimating vulnerability rates, we tried grouping similar model
components in several ways to explore the hypothesis that animals performing comparable roles
in the ecosystem would be vulnerable to predation in comparable ways. For example, we estimated v separately for apex predators (defined here as groups at trophic levels > 4.8), predators
(defined here as groups at trophic levels 3.8-4.8), and prey (defined here as groups at trophic levels < 3.8). None of the alternative vulnerability scenarios were better (lower SS and a more parsimonious parameterization) than estimating a single common v. The best estimate of v was
0.2889. Fits to the relative biomass estimates for Large and Small yellowfin and Large and Small
bigeye are displayed in Figures 3 and 4, respectively. The fits for yellowfin were considerably better than those for bigeye. The fits for yellowfin captured the apparent higher recruitment regime
of 1985-1998 (Maunder and Watters 2002) (Figure 3). The fits for bigeye, however, miss the
increase in relative biomass estimated to have occurred during 1984-1987 (Watters and Maunder
2002) (Figure 4).
DISCUSSION
Applications of the model
The ETP ecosystem model was developed as an hypothetical description of the ecosystem.
The model is also useful for evaluating the possible ecological implications of many alternative
fishing policies that might be proposed as management measures in the ETP.
Changes in fishing effort can be modeled for any gear independently or for any combination
of gears, where gears are defined as three purse-seine fishing modes (dolphin sets, floating-object
sets, and unassociated sets), longline, and pole-and-line. Simulation scenarios that vary fishing
effort might be used when considering reductions in fleet capacity, global limits on the number of
sets of a particular type, or limits on the number of fish-aggregating devices (FADs) that can be
deployed.
Changes in fishing effort on certain species or groups, individually or in unison, can also be
simulated. For example, simulation scenarios that vary catches on particular components of the
ecosystem could be used to evaluate the food web responses to seasonal closures or catch limits
on target species. Changes in fishing mortality on particular suites of species might occur due to
bycatch reduction measures. Sorting grids (Misund and Beltestad 1994) deployed in purse-seine
nets could reduce the fishing mortality on small tunas and other species that aggregate near floating objects by releasing them through the grid while retaining the larger individuals. Regulations
on the characteristics of FADs, if certain characteristics are correlated with attracting certain
species that need protection, could cause a reduction in bycatches of those species.

146

OLSON AND WATTERS
The ecosystem model can be used to simulate changes in fishing effort during certain
periods of the year. Such scenarios might include closures on particular set types, such as a moratorium on floating-object sets after a quota is reached.
Caveats
We know very little about the productivity and standing stocks of several model components, especially those at middle and lower trophic levels. There is large uncertainty associated
with the parameters for many of the components, and given the results of our sensitivity analyses, estimates of biomass and other parameters in Ecopath for the Cephalopods and Auxis spp.
would be especially desirable. Although we estimated v (equation 5) for each component, we cannot determine if we are representing the correct functional response for each component (i.e.
uncertainty in model specification).
For many components in the model, empirical diet data for the ETP were not available,
and we applied information for other areas from literature sources. We had direct diet data for
the two dolphin components, Large and Small yellowfin tuna, Small bigeye tuna, Large and Small
marlins, Large and Small sailfish, Large and Small dorado, Large and Small sharks, Large and
Small wahoo, and Skipjack tuna, but some of these components were represented by small sample sizes. The diets of many of the wide-ranging animals in this large system with diverse subsystems (e.g. upwelling areas versus major gyres) are expected to be variable, which argues for
large sample sizes. No direct diet data were available for many of the medium and small fishes
and invertebrates in the ETP.
We assumed that movement rates of animals into the model area approximately equal
movement rates out. We recognize that some highly-mobile species can extend their distributions
to higher latitudes during El-Niño episodes (Barber and Chavez 1986). The anomalous appearance of tropical animals in temperate regions is well known because it is easy to observe the fact
that large pelagic fishes suddenly appear in areas that they normally do not inhabit. It is plausible, but more difficult to document, that individuals of the same species enter the ETP from the
western-central Pacific warm pool when the interface between the warm pool and the equatorial
upwelling tongue displaces eastward during an El Niño event. Lehodey (2001) documents such
movements for skipjack tuna. These zonal movements may somewhat compensate for simultaneous pole-ward displacements of skipjack and other pelagic species during strong ENSO conditions.
We recognize that our ecosystem model cannot possibly describe all of the complexity
that characterizes the pelagic system in the ETP. Ecosystem models must be compromises
between simplistic representations and unmanageable complexity. Nevertheless, we believe that
the model enables us to gain insight into the relationships between the principal species in the
ecosystem and develop important hypotheses (e.g. Watters et al. in press). We believe that the
work summarized in this paper can also form the foundation for evaluating the ecological effects
of alternative fishing strategies in the ETP.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Some of this work was conducted as part of the Ecological Implications of Alternative
Fishing Strategies for Apex Predators working group supported by the National Center for
Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS), a Center funded by the National Science Foundation
(Grant #DEB-94-21535), the University of California at Santa Barbara, and the state of
California. We appreciate the efforts of the members of this working group in developing and
improving the model. They included Kerim Aydin, Lisa Ballance, Christofer Boggs, Timothy
Essington, Paul Fiedler, Robert Francis, Marco García, James Kitchell, Jeffrey Polovina, Stephen

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

147

Reilly, and Carl Walters. The participants of the IATTC Ecological Studies and Modeling working group also provided valuable input. They were Robin Allen, Kerim Aydin, Richard Deriso,
Elizabeth Edwards, Alain Fonteneau, Marco García, Martín Hall, James Joseph, Elizabeth
Logerwell, Héctor Lopez, Hideki Nakano, Paul Smith, and Daniel Ware. We gratefully acknowledge Lisa Ballance (NMFS, La Jolla) for unpublished information on seabirds, Stephen Reilly
(NMFS, La Jolla) and Michael Scott (IATTC, La Jolla) for unpublished information on marine
mammals in the ETP, and Felipe Galván-Magaña (CICIMAR, México) whose work on food habits
greatly improved our knowledge of the trophic structure in the ETP. We thank an anonymous
reviewer, Fei Chai, and Mark Ohman for information on phytoplankton and zooplankton. The
manuscript was improved by reviews from William Bayliff and the anonymous reviewer. We also
thank Nicholas Webb for his thorough Spanish translation.

FIGURE 1. Sensitivity analysis results for ETP5, using an index of sensitivity (the count of parameters for other model components affected by at least
30% given ±10-50% changes in the input parameters of the components named on the y-axis). The model components are sorted by trophic level estimated
by ETP5.
FIGURA 1. Resultados del análisis de sensibilidad para ETP5, usando un índice de sensibilidad (el número de parámetros de otros componentes del modelo afectados en al menos 30% por cambios de ±10-50% en los parámetros de los componentes identificado en el eje y). Los componentes del modelo están
en el orden del nivel trófico estimado por ETP5.

148
OLSON AND WATTERS

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

149

FIGURE 2. Predicted biomass trajectories for 13 model components that have strong trophic linkages to
Cephalopods and Auxis spp. The top panel shows the predicted biomasses from a simulation using ETP5
with the historical time series of fishing mortalities used to estimate v (see Figure 3). The second panel
shows the predicted biomasses from a second simulation using an Ecopath mass-balance with an altered Q/B
for Cephalopods. The third panel shows the predicted biomasses from a third simulation using an Ecopath
mass-balance with an altered P/B for Auxis spp. The values for Spotted dolphin, Mesopelagic dolphins, and
Small dorado are 1.0 or very close to 1.0 in all cases.
FIGURA 2. Trayectorias predichas de la biomasa para 13 componentes del modelo con vínculos tróficos
fuertes con Cefalópodos y Auxis spp. El recuadro superior ilustra las biomasas predichas de una simulación
usando ETP5 con la serie de tiempo histórica de mortalidad por pesca usada para estimar v (ver Figura 3).
El segundo recuadro ilustra las biomasas predichas de una segunda simulación usando un balance de masas
de Ecopath con un Q/B de Cefalópodos modificado. El tercer recuadro ilustra las biomasas predichas de una tercera
simulación usando un balance de masas de Ecopath con una P/B de Auxis spp. modificada. Los valores para Delfín
manchado, Delfines mesopelágicos, y Dorado pequeño son 1.0 a muy cercanos a 1.0 en todos los casos.

150

OLSON AND WATTERS

FIGURE 3. Simulation results (top panel) of fitting the ETP7 ecosystem model to historical time series of
CPUE for yellowfin tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean. The effort time series (days fishing for three purseseine fishing modes and for pole and line; numbers of hooks for longline gear) are standardized to the effort
in 1993 for each gear (bottom five panels). In the simulation, there was no fishing effort, only climate forcing, between 1910 and 1961. The climate driver is shown in Figure 4. Note: the y axes of the panels are
drawn at different scales. YFT = yellowfin tuna.
FIGURA 3. Resultados de la simulación (recuadro superior) de ajustar el modelo del ecosistema ETP7 a
series de tiempo históricas de CPUE de atún aleta amarilla en el Océano Pacífico oriental. Las series de
tiempo de esfuerzo (días de pesca para tres modalides de pesca con red de cerco y pesca con caña y anzuelo;
número de anzuelos para palangres) están estandarizadas al esfuerzo en 1993 para cada arte (cinco
recuadros inferiores). En la simulación, no hubo esfuerzo de pesca, solamente impulsos climáticos, entre
1910 y 1961. En la Figura 4 se ilustran los impulsos climáticos. Nota: la escala de los ejes y es diferente en
cada recuadro. YFT = atun aleta amarilla.

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

151

FIGURE 4. Simulation results (top panel) of fitting the ETP7 ecosystem model to historical time series of
fishing effort (shown in Figure 3) for bigeye tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean. The bottom panel displays
the SST anomalies for the NIÑO3 region during 1910-1998; we used this time series as a climate driver for
the simulation. BET = bigeye tuna.
FIGURA 4. Resultados de la simulación (recuadro superior) de ajustar el modelo del ecosistema ETP7 a
series de tiempo históricas de esfuerzo de pesca (ilustradas en la Figura 3) de atún patudo en el Océano
Pacífico oriental. El recuadro inferior ilustra las anomalías de la TSM en la región NIÑO3 durante 19101998; usamos esta serie de tiempo como impulsador climático para la simulación. BET = atún patudo.

Bigeye tuna
Black marlin, blue marlin, striped marlin
Sailfish
Swordfish
Common dolphinfish (dorado), pompano dolphinfish (dorado)
Wahoo
Hammerhead, thresher, mako, blacktip, silky,
oceanic whitetip, bull, blue, whitenose
Manta ray
Skipjack tuna
Albacore tuna

Makaira indica, M. mazara, Tetrapturus audax

Istiophorus platypterus

Xiphias gladius

Coryphaena hippurus, C. equiselis

Acanthocybium solandri

Sphyrna spp., Alopias spp., Isurus oxyrinchus, Carcharhinus spp.
(4 species), Prionace glauca, Nasolamia velox
Manta birostris
Katsuwonus pelamis
Thunnus alalunga

Stenella attenuata
Stenella longirostris, Stenella coeruleoalba, Delphinus delphis,
Lagenodelphis hosei, Lagenorhynchus obliquidens
Lepidochelys olivacea, Chelonia mydas, Caretta caretta
Thunnus albacares

Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins

Blue, Bryde's whale1
Dolphins: bottlenose, Risso's, rough-toothed. Whales:
pilot, pygmy killer, false killer, killer, goose-beaked,
beaked, pygmy sperm, sperm
Spotted dolphin
Spinner dolphin, striped dolphin, common dolphin,
Fraser's dolphin, Pacific white-sided dolphin
Olive ridley, green sea, loggerhead
Yellowfin tuna

Common names
Frigatebirds, boobies, terns, shearwaters, petrels, jaegers
Storm petrels, phalaropes

Thunnus obesus

Tursiops, Grampus, Steno, Globicephala, Peponocephala,
Feresa, Pseudorca, Orcinus, Zyphius, Mesoplodon, Kogia, Physeter

Toothed whales

Sea turtles
Yellowfin tuna
(large and small)
Bigeye tuna
(large and small)
Marlins
(large and small)
Sailfish
(large and small)
Swordfish
(large and small)
Dorado
(large and small)
Wahoo
(large and small)
Sharks
(large and small)
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Albacore

Taxa
Fregatidae, Sulidae, Laridae, Procellariidae, Stercorariidae
Oceanitidae, Phalaropodidae
Balaenoptera musculus, B. edeni1

Component
Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Baleen whales

Small <90 cm
Large > 90 cm
Small <80 cm
Large > 80 cm
Small <150 cm
Large > 150 cm
Small <150 cm
Large > 150 cm
Small <150 cm
Large > 150 cm
Small <90 cm
Large > 90 cm
Small <90 cm
Large > 90 cm
Small <150 cm
Large > 150 cm

Size range

TABLE 1a. Food-web components of the pelagic ETP ecosystem model. Size ranges are listed for taxa that are separated into small and large ontogenetic components. The common names do not
necessarily include all the species in the corresponding component.

152
OLSON AND WATTERS

Primarily: Clupeidae, Nomeidae, Balistidae, Ostraciidae,
Sardines, herrings, driftfishes, triggerfishes, filefishes,
Tetraodontidae, Diodontidae, Scomber japonicus,
spiny boxfish, oceanic puffer, porcupine fish, chub mackerel,
Scomberomorus sierra, Engraulidae
sierra, anchovies
Primarily: Phosichthyidae, Myctophidae
Bristlemouths, lightfishes
Primarily: Argonautidae, Octopoteuthidae, Thysanoteuthidae,
Pelagic octopods, argonauts, squids
Ommastrephidae, Enoploteuthidae
Pleuroncodes planipes, Portunus xantusii, Euphylax robustus
Red crabs, pelagic crabs
Copepods (omnivorous and predatory), larval and juvenile euphausiids,
thecosome pteropods, larval fishes, chaetognaths, ctenophores, hydromedusae
Heterotrophic nanoflagellates, heterotrophic dinoflagellates, ciliates, crustacean nauplii
Diatoms, phototrophic dinoflagellates, chlorophytes
Prochlorococcus spp., Synechococcus spp., picoeukaryotes, heterotrophic bacteria

1 Other baleen whales occur seasonally in the model area, but they do not feed there (S. Reilly, NOAA, NMFS, La Jolla, California, U.S.A., personal communication; M. Scott, IATTC, La Jolla,
California, U.S.A., personal communication), so they were not included in the model.

Microzooplankton
Large phytoplankton
Small producers

Crabs
Mesozooplankton

Miscellaneous mesopelagic fishes
Cephalopods

Flyingfishes

Miscellaneous epipelagic fishes

Common names
Size range
Frigate and bullet tuna
Pacific bluefin tuna
Black skipjack, striped bonito, green jack, pilotfish,
jack mackerel, rainbow runner, greater amberjack, snake mackerel
Flyingfishes

Taxa
Auxis thazard, A. rochei
Thunnus orientalis
Euthynnus lineatus, Sarda orientalis, S. chiliensis,
Carangidae, Gempylidae
Primarily: Exocoetus spp., Hirundichthys spp., Prognichthys spp.,
Oxyporhamphus micropterus

Component
Auxis spp.
Bluefin tuna
Miscellaneous piscivores

TABLE 1a. (continued)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

153

Atún patudo
Marlín negro, marlín azul, marlín rayado
Pez vela
Pez espada
Dorados
Peto
Cornuda, zorro, mako, punta negra, isala,
punta blanca, tintorera, pico blanco
Manta
Atún barrilete
Atún albacora

Oceanitidae, Phalaropodidae
Balaenoptera musculus, B. edeni1
Tursiops, Grampus, Steno, Globicephala, Peponocephala,
Feresa, Pseudorca, Orcinus, Zyphius, Mesoplodon, Kogia, Physeter
Stenella attenuata
Stenella longirostris, Stenella coeruleoalba, Delphinus delphis,
Lagenodelphis hosei, Lagenorhynchus obliquidens
Lepidochelys olivacea, Chelonia mydas, Caretta caretta
Thunnus albacares

Thunnus obesus

Makaira indica, M. mazara, Tetrapturus audax

Istiophorus platypterus

Xiphias gladius

Coryphaena hippurus, C. equiselis

Acanthocybium solandri

Sphyrna spp., Alopias spp., Isurus oxyrinchus, Carcharhinus
spp. (4 especies), Prionace glauca, Nasolamia velox
Manta birostris
Katsuwonus pelamis
Thunnus alalunga

Aves forrajeras
Ballenas barbadas
Ballenas dentadas

Pez vela
(grande y pequeño)
Pez espada
(grande y pequeño)
Dorado
(grande y pequeño)
Peto
(grande y pequeño)
Tiburones
(grandes y pequeños)
Rayas
Atún barrilete
Albacora

Tortugas marinas
Atún aleta amarilla
(grande y pequeño)
Atún patudo
(grande y pequeño)
Marlines
(grandes y pequeños)

Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos

Nombres comunes
Fregatas, bobos, golondrinas marinas,
pardelas, petreles, estercorarios
Paiños, falaropos
Azul, de Bryde1
Delfines: tonina, de Risso. Ballenas: piloto, orca pigmea,
orca falsa, orca, cachalote pigmeo, cachalote
Delfín manchado
Delfín tornillo, delfín listado, delfín común,
delfín de Fraser
Golfina, verde, caguama
Atún aleta amarilla

Grupos taxonómicos
Fregatidae, Sulidae, Laridae, Procellariidae, Stercorariidae

Componente
Aves de caza

Peq. <90 cm
Gr. > 90 cm
Peq. <80 cm
Gr. > 80 cm
Peq. <150 cm
Gr. > 150 cm
Peq. <150 cm
Gr. > 150 cm
Peq. <150 cm
Gr. > 150 cm
Peq. <90 cm
Gr. > 90 cm
Peq. <90 cm
Gr. > 90 cm
Peq. <150 cm
Gr. > 150 cm

Rango de tallas

TABLA 1b. Componentes de la red alimenticia del modelo del ecosistema pelágico del POT. Se detallan rangos de tallas para grupos taxonómicos subdivididos en componentes ontogénicos grande
y pequeño. Los nombres comunes no incluyen necesariamente todas las especies en el componente correspondiente.

154
OLSON AND WATTERS

Peces voladores

Principalmente: Exocoetus spp., Hirundichthys spp.,
Prognichthys spp., Oxyporhamphus micropterus

Principalmente: Clupeidae, Nomeidae, Balistidae, Ostraciidae,
Tetraodontidae, Diodontidae, Scomber japonicus,
Scomberomorus sierra, Engraulidae
Principalmente: Phosichthyidae, Myctophidae

Peces voladores

Peces epipelágicos misceláneos

Rango de tallas

1 Otras ballenas barbadas ocurren en ciertas temporadas en el área del modelo, pero no se alimentan en ella (S. Reilly, NOAA, NMFS, La Jolla, California, EE.UU., comunicación personal; M.
Scott, CIAT, La Jolla, California, EE.UU., comunicación personal), por lo que no fueron incluidas en el modelo.

Microzooplancton
Fitoplancton grande
Productores pequeños

Cangrejos rojos, cangrejos pelágicos

Copépodos (omnívoros y depredatorios), eufáusidos larvales y juveniles,
pterópodos tecósomos, peces larvales, caetognatos, ctenóforos, hidromedusas
Nanoflagelados heterotróficos, dinoflagelados heterotróficos, ciliatos, nauplios crustáceos
Diátomos, dinoflagelados fototróficos, clorofitos
Prochlorococcus spp., Synechococcus spp., picoeucariotes, bacterias heterotróficas

Cangrejos

Mesozooplancton

Varios
Octópodos pelágicos, argonautas, calamares

Principalmente: Argonautidae, Octopoteuthidae,
Thysanoteuthidae, Ommastrephidae, Enoploteuthidae
Pleuroncodes planipes, Portunus xantusii, Euphylax robustus

Cefalópodos

Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos

Barrilete negro, salmonete, varios jureles

Euthynnus lineatus, Sarda orientalis, S. chiliensis,
Carangidae, Gempylidae

Piscívoros misceláneos

Sardinas, arenques, peces ballesta, caballas, sierras, anchoas

Nombres comunes
Melvas
Atún aleta azul del Pacífico

Grupos taxonómicos
Auxis thazard, A. rochei
Thunnus orientalis

Componente
Auxis spp.
Atún aleta azul

TABLA 1b. (continuación)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

155

156

OLSON AND WATTERS

TABLE 2a. Parameter estimates for the final version of the model (ETP7). The abbreviations are as follows: B =
biomass; P/B = production/biomass ratio; Q/B = consumption/biomass ratio; EE = ecotrophic efficiency; U/Q =
unassimilated fraction of the diet of each component.
Component

Trophic
B
level (tons·million km-2)

P/B
(year-1)

Q/B
(year-1)

Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Baleen whales
Toothed whales
Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins
Sea turtles
Large yellowfin tuna
Large bigeye tuna
Large marlins
Large sailfish
Large swordfish
Large dorado
Large wahoo

4.75
3.76
3.81
5.22
5.03
4.65
3.62
4.66
5.17
5.32
4.89
4.96
4.61
4.89

600
123
9,100
31,000
3,500
17,000
2601
6,500
9,000
5731
521
331
2181
1,100

0.08
0.15
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.04
0.15
2.35
0.76
1.00
1.15
0.44
1.20
1.20

65.7
65.7
9.1
6.8
16.5
16.5
3.5
15.6
13.0
7.8
7.8
7.8
21.9
9.8

Large sharks
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Albacore
Auxis spp.
Bluefin tuna
Small yellowfin tuna
Small bigeye tuna
Small marlins
Small sailfish
Small swordfish
Small dorado
Small wahoo
Small sharks
Miscellaneous piscivores
Flyingfishes
Misc. epipelagic fishes
Misc. mesopelagic fishes
Cephalopods
Crabs
Mesozooplankton
Microzooplankton
Large phytoplankton
Small producers

4.93
3.68
4.57
4.60
3.86
4.37
4.57
4.53
5.22
4.63
4.42
4.66
4.58
5.23
4.33
3.42
3.19
3.45
4.4
3.46
2.7
2
1
1

400
230
26,4431
3,0261
143,2461
1,400
8,200
10,000
1451
1271
981
2,000
2,7301
270
16,5361
160,6031
2,248,5321
2,000,000
1,104,8011
119,6931
706,7061
826,4221
426,0911
2,999,1711

0.32
0.25
1.88
0.77
2.50
0.65
1.75
0.72
0.50
0.57
0.21
3.15
1.75
0.58
2.25
2.88
2.07
2.00
2.00
3.50
64.00
143.00
125.00
167.00

7.8
3.9
21.5
17.0
25.0
12.8
18.3
15.3
9.0
9.8
9.0
27.4
11.4
9.2
7.7
25.8
10.8
10.8
7.0
10.0
200.0
600.0

EE

U/Q

0.2331

0.31
0.32
0.34
0.31
0.31
0.28
0.35
0.30
0.31
0.29
0.28
0.32
0.30

0.1341
<0.0011
<0.0011
0.2191
0.1901
0.500
0.3601
0.3301
0.500
0.250
0.750
0.250
0.0681
0.4791
0.3611
0.400
0.750
0.950
0.7941
0.9051
0.6891
0.750
0.750
0.750
0.9901
0.750
0.5831
0.950
0.950
0.950
0.9271
0.850
0.950
0.680
0.980
0.900
0.990

0.30
0.29
0.34
0.30
0.30
0.33
0.32
0.29
0.27
0.30
0.28
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.29
0.31
0.35
0.36
0.35
0.29
0.34
0.35
0.42

1 This value, of the set {B, P/B, Q/B, and EE}, was computed by Ecopath. We inputted the remaining three parameter
values.

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

157

TABLA 2b. Estimaciones de los parámetros de la versión final del modelo (ETP7). Se usan las abreviaturas siguientes:
B = biomasa; P/B = cociente producción/biomasa; Q/B = cociente consumo/biomasa; EE = eficacia ecotrófica; U/Q = fracción no asimilada de la dieta de cada componente.
Componente
Aves de caza
Aves forrajeras
Ballenas barbadas
Ballenas dentadas
Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos
Tortugas marinas
Atún aleta amarilla
grande
Atún patudo grande
Marlines grandes
Pez vela grande
Pez espada grande
Dorado grande
Peto grande
Tiburones grandes
Rayas
Atún barrilete
Albacora
Auxis spp.
Atún aleta azul

Nivel
B
trófico (toneladas·millón km-2)

P/B
(Año-1)

Q/B
(Año-1)

EE

U/Q

4.75
3.76
3.81
5.22
5.03
4.65
3.62

600
123
9,100
31,000
3,500
17,000
2601

0.08
0.15
0.02
0.02
0.04
0.04
0.15

65.7
65.7
9.1
6.8
16.5
16.5
3.5

0.2331
0.1341
<0.0011
<0.0011
0.2191
0.1901
0.500

0.31
0.32
0.34
0.31
0.31
0.28
0.35

4.66

6,500

2.35

15.6

0.3601

0.30

5.17
5.32
4.89
4.96
4.61
4.89
4.93
3.68
4.57
4.60
3.86
4.37

9,000
5731
521
331
2181
1,100
400
230
26,4431
3,0261
143,2461
1,400

0.76
1.00
1.15
0.44
1.20
1.20
0.32
0.25
1.88
0.77
2.50
0.65

13.0
7.8
7.8
7.8
21.9
9.8
7.8
3.9
21.5
17.0
25.0
12.8

0.3301
0.500
0.250
0.750
0.250
0.0681
0.4791
0.3611
0.400
0.750
0.950
0.7941

0.31
0.29
0.28
0.32
0.30
0.30
0.29
0.34
0.30
0.30
0.33
0.32

4.57

8,200

1.75

18.3

0.9051

0.29

0.72
0.50
0.57
0.21
3.15
1.75
0.58

15.3
9.0
9.8
9.0
27.4
11.4
9.2

0.6891
0.750
0.750
0.750
0.9901
0.750
0.5831

0.27
0.30
0.28
0.30
0.30
0.30
0.29

Atún aleta amarilla
pequeño
Atún patudo pequeño
Marlines pequeños
Pez vela pequeño
Pez espada pequeño
Dorado pequeño
Peto pequeño
Tiburones pequeños
Piscívoros misceláneos

4.53
5.22
4.63
4.42
4.66
4.58
5.23
4.33

10,000
1451
1271
981
2,000
2,7301
270
16,5361

Peces voladores

3.42

160,6031

2.25
2.88

7.7
25.8

0.950
0.950

0.31
0.35

Peces epipelágicos
misceláneos
Peces mesopelágicos
misceláneos
Cefalópodos
Cangrejos
Mesozooplancton
Microzooplancton
Fitoplancton grande
Productores pequeños

3.19

2,248,5321

2.07

10.8

0.950

0.36

3.45

2,000,000

2.00

10.8

0.9271

0.35

4.4
3.46
2.7
2
1
1

1,104,8011
119,6931
706,7061
826,4221
426,0911
2,999,1711

2.00
3.50
64.00
143.00
125.00
167.00

7.0
10.0
200.0
600.0

0.850
0.950
0.680
0.980
0.900
0.990

0.29
0.34
0.35
0.42

1 Este valor, del conjunto {B, P/B, Q/B, y EE}, fue computado por Ecopath. Insertamos los valores de los otros tres
parámetros.

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Baleen whales
Toothed whales
Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins
Sea turtles
Large yellowfin tuna
Large bigeye tuna
Large marlins
Large sailfish
Large swordfish
Large dorado
Large wahoo
Large sharks
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Albacore
Auxis spp.
Bluefin tuna
Small yellowfin tuna
Small bigeye tuna
Small marlins
Small sailfish
Small swordfish
Small dorado
Small wahoo
Small sharks
Miscellaneous piscivores
Flyingfishes
Misc. epipelagic fishes
Misc. mesopelagic fishes
Cephalopods
Crabs
Mesozooplankton
Microzooplankton
Large phytoplankton
Small producers
Detritus
Prey from outside the ETP

Prey

0.550
0.050
0.050
0.350

1

0.390
0.260

0.050
0.300

2

0.020
0.026
0.840

0.114

3

TABLE 3a. Diet matrix for the final version of the model (ETP7).

0.010
0.070
0.088
0.158
0.597

0.050
0.020
0.090
0.038
0.646
0.006
0.001

0.011

0.058

0.001

5

0.010
0.015

0.040
0.005
0.060
0.001
0.005
0.020

4

0.176
0.541
0.253
0.020

0.010

6

0.050
0.100
0.469
0.301
0.030

0.050

7

9

0.017
0.050
0.285
0.048
0.036
0.008
0.001
0.001

0.004

0.093
0.090
0.713
0.020

0.063

0.005
0.001 0.001
0.542 0.020
0.001
0.001

8

Predator

0.095

0.025
0.006
0.060

0.005
0.005
0.001
0.024
0.024

0.218
0.005
0.220
0.006
0.251

0.020
0.020

0.003
0.012

10

0.006
0.004

0.073
0.369
0.090

0.250

0.022
0.005
0.005
0.001
0.046
0.031

0.105

0.010

0.005

11

0.066

0.273
0.005
0.604

0.002

0.005
0.001
0.001
0.021

12

0.049
0.551
0.064
0.146
0.107
0.015

0.018

0.035
0.001
0.014

13

0.056
0.152
0.130
0.073
0.125
0.046

0.022
0.001

0.228
0.003
0.113
0.007

0.044

14

0.040
0.011
0.392
0.011
0.115
0.014

0.139
0.005
0.051
0.002
0.096
0.010
0.003
0.003
0.001
0.019
0.040

0.003
0.017
0.006
0.010
0.010

15
0.002

0.050
0.050
0.450
0.300

0.150

16

0.012
0.312
0.176
0.303
0.003
0.069
0.046

0.001

0.077

0.001

17

0.026
0.050
0.538
0.010
0.250
0.016
0.009

0.100

0.002

18

158
OLSON AND WATTERS

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Baleen whale
Toothed whales
Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins
Sea turtles
Large yellowfin tuna
Large bigeye tuna
Large marlins
Large sailfish
Large swordfish
Large dorado
Large wahoo
Large sharks
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Albacore
Auxis spp.
Bluefin tuna
Small yellowfin tuna
Small bigeye tuna
Small marlins
Small sailfish
Small swordfish
Small dorado
Small wahoo
Small sharks
Miscellaneous piscivores
Flyingfishes
Misc. epipelagic fishes
Misc. mesopelagic fishes
Cephalopods
Crabs
Mesozooplankton
Microzooplankton
Large phytoplankton
Small producers
Detritus
Prey from outside the ETP

Prey

TABLE 3a. (continued)

0.482
0.146

0.667

0.007
0.100
0.003

0.200

0.007
0.072
0.372
0.252
0.180
0.010
0.002
0.001

0.017

0.030
0.250
0.010
0.030

0.001

0.100
0.001
0.001

0.003

0.050

0.002

21

0.003

20

0.001

19

0.132
0.020

0.020
0.035
0.218

22

0.130
0.575
0.100

0.204
0.001
0.059
0.050
0.010
0.010
0.001
0.100
0.050
0.005
0.150

0.050

0.050
0.010

0.010
0.010

23

0.030
0.020

0.200
0.419
0.102

0.100

0.031
0.021

0.071

0.006

24

0.106

0.660
0.121
0.234

25

27

0.074
0.439
0.118
0.030
0.146
0.022

0.120

0.074
0.150
0.480

0.027 0.027

0.053 0.119

26

Predator
28

0.036
0.010
0.184
0.070
0.097
0.012

0.046
0.009
0.397
0.009
0.003
0.003
0.001
0.018
0.035

0.127

0.002
0.008

0.002
0.001

0.060
0.180
0.066
0.044

0.010
0.050
0.430

0.080
0.001
0.009

29

0.602
0.398

30

0.005
0.475
0.280
0.200

0.040

31

0.640
0.360

32

0.030
0.250
0.420
0.150
0.030
0.072
0.048

33

0.456
0.264
0.100

0.100
0.070
0.010

34

0.696
0.304

35

1.000

36

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
159

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Aves de caza
Aves forrajeras
Ballenas barbadas
Ballenas dentadas
Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos
Tortugas marinas
Atún aleta amarilla grande
Atún patudo grande
Marlines grandes
Pez vela grande
Pez espada grande
Dorado grande
Peto grande
Tiburones grandes
Rayas
Atún barrilete
Albacora
Auxis spp.
Atún aleta azul
Atún aleta amarilla pequeño
Atún patudo pequeño
Marlines pequeños
Pez vela pequeño
Pez espada pequeño
Dorado pequeño
Peto pequeño
Tiburones pequeños
Piscívoros misceláneos
Peces voladores
Peces epipelágicos misceláneos
Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos
Cefalópodos
Cangrejos
Mesozooplancton
Microzooplancton
Fitoplancton grande
Productores pequeños
Detritos
Presas de fuera del POT

Presa

0.550
0.050
0.050
0.350

1

0.390
0.260

0.050
0.300

2

0.020
0.026
0.840

0.114

3

TABLA 3b. Matriz de dietas para la versión final del modelo (ETP7).

0.010
0.070
0.088
0.158
0.597

0.050
0.020
0.090
0.038
0.646
0.006
0.001

0.011

0.058

0.001

5

0.010
0.015

0.040
0.005
0.060
0.001
0.005
0.020

4

0.176
0.541
0.253
0.020

0.010

6

0.050
0.100
0.469
0.301
0.030

0.050

7

9

0.017
0.050
0.285
0.048
0.036
0.008
0.001
0.001

0.004

0.093
0.090
0.713
0.020

0.063

0.005
0.001 0.001
0.542 0.020
0.001
0.001

8

10

0.095

0.025
0.006
0.060

0.005
0.005
0.001
0.024
0.024

0.218
0.005
0.220
0.006
0.251

0.020
0.020

0.003
0.012

Depredador

0.006
0.004

0.073
0.369
0.090

0.250

0.022
0.005
0.005
0.001
0.046
0.031

0.105

0.010

0.005

11

0.066

0.273
0.005
0.604

0.002

0.005
0.001
0.001
0.021

12

0.049
0.551
0.064
0.146
0.107
0.015

0.018

0.035
0.001
0.014

13

0.056
0.152
0.130
0.073
0.125
0.046

0.022
0.001

0.228
0.003
0.113
0.007

0.044

14

15

0.040
0.011
0.392
0.011
0.115
0.014

0.139
0.005
0.051
0.002
0.096
0.010
0.003
0.003
0.001
0.019
0.040

0.003
0.017
0.006
0.010
0.010

0.002

0.050
0.050
0.450
0.300

0.150

16

0.012
0.312
0.176
0.303
0.003
0.069
0.046

0.001

0.077

0.001

17

0.026
0.050
0.538
0.010
0.250
0.016
0.009

0.100

0.002

18

160
OLSON AND WATTERS

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34
35
36
37
38
39
40

Aves de caza
Aves forrajeras
Ballenas barbadas
Ballenas dentadas
Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos
Tortugas marinas
Atún aleta amarilla grande
Atún patudo grande
Marlines grandes
Pez vela grande
Pez espada grande
Dorado grande
Peto grande
Tiburones grandes
Rayas
Atún barrilete
Albacora
Auxis spp.
Atún aleta azul
Atún aleta amarilla pequeño
Atún patudo pequeño
Marlines pequeños
Pez vela pequeño
Pez espada pequeño
Dorado pequeño
Peto pequeño
Tiburones pequeños
Piscívoros misceláneos
Peces voladores
Peces epipelágicos misceláneos
Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos
Cefalópodos
Cangrejos
Mesozooplancton
Microzooplancton
Fitoplancton grande
Productores pequeños
Detritos
Presas de fuera del POT

Presa

TABLA 3b. (continuación)

0.482
0.146

0.667

0.007
0.100
0.003

0.200

0.007
0.072
0.372
0.252
0.180
0.010
0.002
0.001

0.017

0.030
0.250
0.010
0.030

0.001

0.100
0.001
0.001

0.003

0.050

0.002

21

0.003

20

0.001

19

0.132
0.020

0.020
0.035
0.218

22

0.130
0.575
0.100

0.204
0.001
0.059
0.050
0.010
0.010
0.001
0.100
0.050
0.005
0.150

0.050

0.050
0.010

0.010
0.010

23

0.030
0.020

0.200
0.419
0.102

0.100

0.031
0.021

0.071

0.006

24

0.106

0.660
0.121
0.234

25

0.074
0.439
0.118
0.030
0.146
0.022

0.120

0.074
0.150
0.480

0.027 0.027

0.053 0.119

27

28

0.036
0.010
0.184
0.070
0.097
0.012

0.046
0.009
0.397
0.009
0.003
0.003
0.001
0.018
0.035

0.127

0.002
0.008

0.002
0.001

Depredador
26

0.060
0.180
0.066
0.044

0.010
0.050
0.430

0.080
0.001
0.009

29

0.602
0.398

30

0.005
0.475
0.280
0.200

0.040

31

0.640
0.360

32

0.030
0.250
0.420
0.150
0.030
0.072
0.048

33

0.456
0.264
0.100

0.100
0.070
0.010

34

0.696
0.304

35

1.000

36

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
161

Abundance estimates (Wade and
After Trites et al. (1999)
Gerrodette 1993) multiplied by average weights (Cummings 1985,
Yochem and Leatherwood 1985,
Trites et al. 1999), assuming comparable weight-length relationship for
Bryde's and sei whales (Gambell 1985)

Baleen whales4

Sea turtles

Polovina (1984), Opitz (1996)

Polovina (1984), Opitz (1996)

Assumed a “medium” amount of Márquez (1990)2, P. Dutton
production consumed by preda- (pers. comm.)3,6
tion2; revised down due to overestimated predation and low
bycatch3

Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

M for bottlenose dolphin (Wells and Assumed comparable to Dall's
Scott 1990); F from IATTC observer porpoise (Pauly and
Christensen 1996)
data and B estimates

Mesopelagic
dolphins

Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

M for bottlenose dolphin (Wells and Assumed comparable to Dall's
Scott 1990); F from IATTC observer porpoise (Pauly and
data and B estimates
Christensen 1996)

Abundance estimates (Wade and
Gerrodette 1993) multiplied by average weights from many sources (M.
Scott, pers. comm.)5. Contact authors
for details
Abundance estimates (Wade and
Gerrodette 1993) multiplied by average weights from many sources (M.
Scott, pers. comm.)5. Contact authors
for details

Spotted dolphin

Adjusted from Pauly and
Christensen (1996)

Mean M for killer whales (Brault and
Caswell 1993) and sperm whales
(Chapman 1980)2; F from IATTC
observer data and B estimates2;
revised P/B consistent with Alaska Gyre
(Pauly and Christensen 1996)3

Biomass-weighted average for
blue whales (Yochem and
Leatherwood 1985, Pauly and
Christensen 1996) and Bryde's
whales (Yochem and Leatherwood
1985)

Small value due to low predation L. Ballance (pers. comm.)1
in ETP2; discarded this assumption after obtaining B estimate
and solved for EE in Ecopath3

Abundance estimates (Wade and
Gerrodette 1993) multiplied by average weights from many sources (M.
Scott, pers. comm.)5. Contact authors
for details

Biomass-weighted average for
beaked, goose-beaked, killer,
and sperm whales from Pauly
and Christensen (1996)2; revised
lower for mass balance3

Diet

Small value due to low predaton Ballance and Pitman (1999); L.
in ETP2; discarded this assump- Ballance (pers. comm.)1
tion after obtaining B estimate
and estimated EE in Ecopath3

EE

Toothed whales

After Yochem and Leatherwood
(1985), Pauly and Christensen
(1996), and Trites et al. (1999)

Scaled up from Q/B of Pursuit
birds2 (Flint and Nagy 1984)2;
L. Ballance (pers. comm.)3

Scaled up from P/B for Pursuit
birds2; after Warham (1990)3,
Warham (1996)3

Strip-transect surveys (1989-90)1,3

After Flint and Nagy (1984)2,
Muck and Pauly (1987)2,
Ballance (1995)2, L. Ballance
(pers. comm.)1,3

Q/B (year-1)

After Christensen and Pauly (1993)2;
Pauly et al. (1996)2; Nelson (1978)3;
Furness and Monaghan (1987)3;
Warham (1996)3; L. Ballance (pers.
comm.)1,3

Grazing birds

P/B (year-1)

Strip-transect surveys

(1989-90)1,3

Biomass (tons·million km-2)

Pursuit birds

Component

TABLE 4a. Sources and assumptions of the Ecopath parameter and diet-composition estimates for the pelagic ecosystem model of the ETP. When multiple references are noted, we often used a
mean value (across references) in the model. Information sources for the initial (ETP1) and revised (ETP7) estimates are identified by footnotes 2 and 3.

162
OLSON AND WATTERS

IATTC stock assessments (adapted
from IATTC 1998, IATTC 1999a)

IATTC stock assessments (adapted
from IATTC 1998, IATTC 1999a)

Large yellowfin
tuna

Large bigeye
tuna

Large dorado

Large swordfish4

M estimated from regressions on K,
L , and temperature in Pauly (1980),
data from Boggs (1989) for Pacific and
Atlantic; assumed F = 2M due to
declines in landings2; revised assumption: F = M based on offshore fishery
and coastal sailfish distribution3
M from Boggs (1989), and estimated
from regressions on K, L , and temperature in Pauly (1980), data from
Boggs (1989); assumed F = M
because catches in EPO have been stable (Hinton and Bayliff 2002)
Mean M from Table 3.7 of Opitz (1996)
based on Pauly (1980), F assumed to be
02; assumed F = 0.5 M3
Assumed comparable to yellowfin
tuna based on comparable standard metabolic rates (Brill
1996)2; revised estimate from
Olson and Galván-Magaña
(2002)3

Assumed same as for Large
marlins and Large sailfish

After Yabe et al. (1959), de Sylva
(1962), and Stillwell and Kohler
(1985), Hernández-García (1995),
Markaida and Sosa-Nishizaki
(1998)

Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

High value assumed due to erro- After Olson and Galván-Magaña
neous assumption that most pro- (2002)
duction utilized in ecosystem2;
assumed low EE based on assumption that F < M 3, 7

High value assumed due to erroneous assumption that most production utilized in ecosystem2;
assumed that F = M because
catches have declined in recent
years but fishing has moved further
offshore, so assumed low EE 3, 7
Based on assumption that F = M,
but they are caught mostly in the
northern extreme of model area7

High value assumed due to erro- Unpublished stomach-contents
neous assumption that most pro- data (IATTC)
duction utilized in ecosystem2;
assumed that F = M since catches have been stable3, 7

Geometric means from Juhl
(1955), King and Ikehara (1956),
and Blunt (1960)

Scaled-down Q/B for yellowfin
based on larger body size
Scaled-down Q/B for yellowfin
based on differences in body
size and averaged for 3
species2; further reduced because
marlins, unlike yellowfin tuna,
are not warm-bodied3
Scaled-down Q/B for yellowfin
based on differences in body
size2; further reduced because
marlins, unlike yellowfin tuna,
are not warm-bodied3

Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

Bioenergetics estimates (Olson
and Boggs 1986) cost of reproduction corrected from
Schaefer (1998)

Diet

M from abundance-weighted average
of age-specific M vectors; F from
biomass estimate and catch at age
multiplied by average weights
(IATTC stock assessments adapted
from IATTC 1998, IATTC 1999a)
M after IATTC stock assessments; F
from estimated yield divided by estimated B (adapted from IATTC 1998,
IATTC 1999a)
M estimated from regressions on K,
L , and temperature in Pauly
(1980), data from Boggs (1989) for 3
species; assumed that F = M since
catches have been stable3

EE

Q/B (year-1)

P/B (year-1)

8

Large sailfish

Large marlins

Biomass (tons·million km-2)

Component

TABLE 4a. (continued)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
163

8

8

Biomass (tons·million km-2)

Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)
After Bigelow and Schroeder
(1953), Notarbartolo-di-Sciara
(1988)
Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

Assumed comparable to lemon
Mean M for 5 species after
Smith et al. (1998); F from esti- sharks (after Cortés 1997)
mated yield (IATTC observer
data) divided by estimated B
Assumed half that of Large
sharks due to assumed lower
activity
After Kitchell et al. (1978)

Assumed mean M comparable
to that of Large sharks; F from
estimated yield (IATTC observer data) divided by estimated B
M from yield-per-recruit analyses (IATTC 1998); mean F at
age (Tomlinson, pers. comm.)9

Assumed 30% lower than that of
small yellowfin due to lower
growth rates and lower preferred
temperatures

Biomass-weighted average Z
(F+M) (Bayliff 1993, Bayliff
1994, IATTC 1999a)

Average abundances times average
weights for 1966-82 (Bayliff 1993,
Bayliff 1994, IATTC 1999a)

Bluefin tuna4

After Pinkas et al. (1971)10

Assumed comparable to that of Assumed large proportion of pro- After Okada (1955), Tester and
duction is consumed by
skipjack tuna2; scaled Q/B of
Nakamura (1957) , Yokota et al.
skipjack down in proportion to predators3
(1961), Whitley (1964)
body size differences using ratio
Small yellowfin/Large yellowfin)3

Assumed M comparable to skipjack tuna (IATTC stock assessments) and F very small based
on yield and biomass2;
increased to balance predation
demand3

Divided bioenergetics estimate of production due to predation by yellowfin
tuna (Olson and Boggs 1986) by estimate of P/B2; predation by other
major predators unknown, so we
inputted EE and solved for B in
Ecopath3

Auxis spp.

After Pinkas et al. (1971), Murray
(1994), Froese and Pauly (2000)

After Hampton and Fournier
(2000)

High value due to assumption
that most of the production is
used by predators and cannibalism2; adjusted lower because
assumed F<<M since considered
underexploited 3, 7
Inhabit epipelagic layer like yel- Assumed comparable to Small
lowfin tuna (Laurs et al. 1982). billfishes and Wahoo
Based on size composition of
Japanese longline catches, Q/B
estimated as average of Q/Bs of
large and small yellowfin tuna

Albacore4

Skipjack tuna

Divided CPUE (tons per set) from
IATTC observer database by size- and
set type-specific q’s estimated for yellowfin tuna

Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

Assumed comparable to Small
sailfish

Diet
Based on data for Carangidae and
Gempylidae from FishBase (Froese
and Pauly 2000) and IATTC
unpubl. data; black skipjack from
Yoshida (1979) and IATTC
unpubl. data

Assumed comparable to Large
dorado

EE

Initial estimate: mean for relevant species >5 kg from Opitz
(1996, Appendix 8.7)2; revised
estimate for all sizes (Opitz
1996, Appendix 8.7)3

Mean M for several species and
localities estimated from
regressions on K, L , and temperature in Pauly (1980), data
from FishBase (Froese and
Pauly 2000) and Opitz (1996)
High value due to assumption
that most of the production is
used by predators and cannibalism3

Q/B (year-1)

P/B (year-1)

8

Rays

Large miscellaDivided CPUE (tons per set) from
neous piscivores8 IATTC observer database by size- and
set type-specific q’s estimated for yellowfin tuna2; after removing wahoo
and combining Large and Small misc.
piscivores we specified EE and solved
for B in Ecopath3
Divided CPUE (tons per set) from
Large wahoo4
IATTC observer database by size- and
set type-specific q’s estimated for yellowfin tuna
Large sharks
Divided CPUE (tons per set) from
IATTC observer database by size- and
set type-specific q’s estimated for yellowfin tuna

Component

TABLE 4a. (continued)

164
OLSON AND WATTERS

P/B (year-1)
Diet

See Large miscellaneous piscivores
Assumed lower than P/B of
Assumed comparable to Small
Skipjack because Wahoo are larger dorado and Small yellowfin2;
and live longer
scaled Q/B of Small yellowfin down
in same Q/B proportion as Large
wahoo/Large yellowfin tuna3

8

Small wahoo4

Small miscellaneous
piscivores8

8

Assumed same as for Small yellowfin due to similar standard
metabolic rates2; from Olson and
Galván-Magaña (2002)3

High value due to assumption that After Manooch and Hogarth (1983)
most of the production used by
predators and cannibalism2;
reevaluated assumption and added
0.25 to EE of previous estimate3

After Olson and Galván-Magaña
(2002)

Assumed same as for Small mar- Assumed same as for Small mar- After Nakamura (1985)
lins
lins and Small sailfish

M estimated from regressions on
K, L , and temperature in Pauly
(1980), data from Boggs (1989);
estimated F by reducing F for
Large swordfish by ratio of Small
swordfish discards to Large swordfish landings
Mean M from Table 3.7 of Opitz
(1996) based on Pauly (1980), F
estimated from yield and biomass
estimates2; increased to balance
because M from literature may
have been for large fish3

Small swordfish4

Divided CPUE (tons per set) from
IATTC observer database by sizeand set type-specific q’s estimated
for yellowfin tuna2, increased to
balance high predation demands3

High value assumed due to erro- After Nakamura (1985)
neous assumption that most production utilized in ecosystem2;
reduced because exploitation not
so high - assumed EE comparable
to that of Large marlins 3, 7

Scaled-down Q/B for yellowfin
based on differences in body
size2; further reduced because
sailfish, unlike yellowfin tuna,
are not warm-bodied3

M estimated from regressions on
K, L , and temperature in Pauly
(1980), data from Boggs (1989) for
Pacific and Atlantic; estimated F
by reducing F for Large sailfish by
ratio of Small sailfish discards to
Large sailfish landings

Small sailfish

8

Small dorado

High value assumed due to erro- After Nakamura (1985)
neous assumption that most production utilized in ecosystem2;
reduced because exploitation not
so high - assumed EE is 0.25
greater than that of Large marlins 3, 7

Scaled-down Q/B for yellowfin
based on differences in body size
and averaged for 3 species2; further reduced because marlins,
unlike yellowfin tuna, are not
warm-bodied3

M estimated from regressions on
K, L , and temperature in Pauly
(1980), data from Boggs (1989) for
3 species; estimated F by reducing
F for Large marlins by ratio of
Small marlin discards to Large marlin landings

Small marlins

Small yellowfin
tuna

Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

EE

Small bigeye tuna IATTC stock assessments (adapted M after IATTC stock assessments; Scaled-down Q/B for yellowfin
from IATTC 1998, IATTC 1999a) F from estimated yield divided by based on larger body size of bigestimated B (adapted from IATTC eye
1998, IATTC 1999a)

Q/B (year-1)
Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

IATTC stock assessments (adapted M from averaging age-specific M
from IATTC 1998, IATTC 1999a) vectors; F from biomass estimate
and catch at age multiplied by
average weights (adapted from
IATTC 1998, IATTC 1999a)

Biomass (tons·million km-2)
Bioenergetics estimates (Olson
and Boggs 1986), cost of reproduction corrected from Schaefer
(1998)

Component

TABLE 4a. (continued)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
165

Q/B (year-1)
Assumed 1.25 times Q/B of
Large sharks because smaller
body size2; adjusted to 1.17
times Q/B of Large sharks using
ratio Large yellowfin/Small yellowfin3

P/B (year-1)
Mean M for 4 species after
Smith et al. (1998); F from estimated yield (IATTC observer
data) divided by estimated B2

Mean for two species after
Longhurst and Pauly (1987)2;
lowered because cannibalism
too high to balance with zooplankton production3

Mean of two estimates of M
from Ehrhardt (1983) and two
estimates from Longhurst and
Pauly (1987)2; increased to balance high predation demands3

Epipelagic
cephalopods11

Crabs

Z from catch curve fitted to
survey data of Blackburn
(1977)

Assumed (for Pleuroncodes planipes) middle of range of daily
rations for 9 species of decapod
crustaceans (after Maynou and
Cartes 1998)2; revised to correct
error in conversion from dry to
wet weight3

Assumed diet is only mesozooplankton and microzooplankton

Assumed a “medium” amount of
production goes to detritus2;
revised upward to be consistent
with other forage species3

After Aurioles-Gamboa (1977)

High value based on assumption After Ehrhardt (1983), Nixon
that most of the production is used (1987), Ehrhardt (1991), and
by predators2; lowered to take into Shchetinnikov (1992)
account diel vertical migrations
into mesopelagic layers, absence of
fishing on cephalopods in model,
and underestimated cephalopod
component of predator diets3

See Epipelagic cephalopods. Mesopelagic cephalopods were combined with them.

Assumed comparable to Q/B of
Misc. epipelagic fishes

After Lewis (1961), Gorelova
(1980), Lipskaya (1980), and
Lipskaya (1987)

Unpublished stomach-contents
data (IATTC)

Diet

Assumed that 80% of the produc- After information for a variety of
tion is consumed by predators2; species from FishBase (Froese and
revised assuming that 95% is con- Pauly 2000)
sumed by predators (consistent
with other forage fishes, e.g.
Auxis spp.3)

Calculated from total metabolism High value based on assumption
estimates (Belokopytin and
that most of the production is
Abolmasova 1988) averaged with used by predators3
ration estimates (Gorelova 1980,
Lipskaya 1980, Lipskaya 1987)
and reduced by 25% because estimates based on small fish

Averaged estimates of M for
Averaged estimates for many
many species from FishBase
species from Opitz (1996,
(Froese and Pauly 2000) and
Appendix 8.7)
Opitz (1996); assumed F = M
because no evidence of declines
in discards during last 5 y

Extrapolated line-transect estimates Mean M for 3 species from the
western Pacific Ocean (Dalzell
of density (Oxenford et al. 1995) to
1993)
ETP model area and multiplied by
average weight estimate (Campana et
al. 1993)2; reevaluated assumption
and specified EE instead, solving for B
in Ecopath3

After Longhurst and Pauly
(1987, p. 255)

Mesopelagic
cephalopods11

EE

Omitted because most predation on anchovies is in coastal areas, which are not adequately represented by the model.
Moved Anchovies into Miscellaneous epipelagic fishes

Divided CPUE (tons per set) from
IATTC observer database by size- and
set type-specific q’s estimated for yellowfin tuna2

Biomass (tons·million km-2)

Miscellaneous
Estimated from upper end of density
mesopelagic fishes range given by Longhurst and Pauly
(1987)

Miscellaneous
epipelagic fishes

Flyingfishes

Anchovies

Small sharks

Component

TABLE 4a. (continued)

166
OLSON AND WATTERS

After Polovina (1984)2; after
Vinogradov et al. (1976), Ikeda
(1977), Dam et al. (1995), Chavez et
al. (1996), Verity et al. (1996)3

Mean for herbivorous zooplankton after Longhurst and Pauly
(1987)2; after Chai et al. (2002,
Fig. 7)3
Means from Polovina (1984) and Not applicable
Valiela (1984)2; after Chai et al.
(2002, Fig. 7)3

Microzooplankton12

Large
phytoplankton13

12
13

11

9
10

8

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Diet

Assumed a “medium” amount of
production goes to detritus2; flow
in/flow out adjusted by proportion
recycled (after Chai et al. 2002, Fig.
7)3
Estimated from sedimentation
rates at depth (after Valiela 1984)
interpolated to 1000 m2; flow
in/flow out adjusted by proportion
recycled (after Chai et al. 2002, Fig.
7)3
Ratio of flow in to flow out adjusted by proportion recycled (after
Chai et al. 2002, Fig. 7)3

Not applicable

Not applicable

After Longhurst and Pauly
(1987, Table 4.3); after Chai et
al. (2002, Fig. 7)3

Assumed a “medium” amount of After Longhurst and Pauly
production goes to detritus2; flow (1987, Table 4.3); after Chai et
in/flow out adjusted by proportion al. (2002, Fig. 7)3
recycled (after Chai et al. 2002, Fig.
7)3

EE

L. Ballance, NOAA, NMFS, La Jolla, California, USA.
Initial parameter estimates (ETP1).
Revised parameter estimates (ETP7).
This component was not in the original model (ETP1), but was added during revisions (ETP2-ETP7).
M. Scott, IATTC, La Jolla, California, USA.
P. Dutton, NOAA, NMFS, La Jolla, California, USA.
We assigned EE to this component based on our assumptions of the relative magnitude of F versus M. If F was assumed to be low relative to M, we assigned a low EE. If F was assumed to be
about equal to M, we assumed EE = 0.5. If F was assumed to be high relative to M, we assigned a high EE.
Original Large and Small miscellaneous piscivores components were combined into Miscellaneous piscivores. Original Miscellaneous piscivores group included wahoo, but we removed wahoo
due to its dissimilarity with other species in this component.
P. Tomlinson, IATTC, La Jolla, California, USA.
For predators that eat Pacific bluefin tuna (PBT) in the eastern Pacific (EPO), we divided the contribution of PBT in the diet of those predators by 3 (assuming PBT are in the EPO four months
per year) and multiplied by 0.07 (because we assumed PBT and other components overlap in 7% of model area).
These are initial components, and were combined as Cephalopods because their production could not balance cannibalism demands between these components. P/B and Q/B were assumed
comparable for both components.
There was only one Zooplankton component in ETP1. We divided it into two components in ETP7 based on size, after Chai et al. (2002).
There was only one Producer component in ETP1. We divided it into two components in ETP7 based on size, after Chai et al. (2002)

Small producers13

Not applicable

Assumed 0.5*Q/B of herbivorous
zooplankton because P/B for carniv.
zoopl. half that for herb. zoopl.2;
after Vinogradov et al. (1976), Ikeda
(1977), Dam et al. (1995), Chavez et
al. (1996), Verity et al. (1996)3

Mean for carnivorous zooplankton after Longhurst and Pauly
(1987)2; after Chai et al. (2002,
Fig. 7)3

Mesozooplankton12

After Chai et al. (2002, Fig. 7)3

Q/B (year-1)

P/B (year-1)

Component

Biomass (tons·million km-2)

TABLE 4a. (continued)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
167

Estudios de transectos de bandas
(1989-90)1,3

Estimaciones de abundancia (Wade y
Gerrodette 1993) multiplicadas por
peso promedio (Cummings 1985,
Yochem y Leatherwood 1985, Trites et
al. 1999), suponiendo una relación pesotalla comparable para ballenas de Bryde
y rorcuales del norte (Gambell 1985)
Estimaciones de abundancia (Wade y
Gerrodette 1993) multiplicadas por
peso promedio de muchas fuentes (M.
Scott, com. pers.)5. Obtener detalles
de los autores

Aves forrajeras

Ballenas
barbadas4

De Trites et al. (1999)

De Christensen y Pauly
Pauly et al. (1996)2; Nelson (1978)3;
Furness y Monaghan (1987)3;
Warham (1996)3; L Ballance (com.
pers.)1,3
Escalado a partir del P/B de Aves de
caza2; de Warham (1990)3, Warham
(1996)3

(1993)2;

P/B (año-1)

Tortugas marinas

Ballenas
dentadas

Polovina (1984), Opitz (1996)

M promedio de orcas (Brault y
Caswell 1993) y cachalotes (Chapman
1980)2; F de datos de observadores de
la CIAT y estimaciones de B2 ; P/B
revisado consistente con Giro de
Alaska (Pauly y Christensen 1996)3
Delfín manchado Estimaciones de abundancia (Wade y M de Tursiops (Wells y Scott 1990);
Gerrodette 1993) multiplicadas por F de datos de observadores de la
peso promedio de muchas fuentes (M. CIAT y estimaciones de B
Scott, com. pers.)5. Obtener detalles
los autores
Estimaciones de abundancia (Wade y M de Tursiops (Wells y Scott 1990);
Delfines
Gerrodette 1993) multiplicadas por F de datos de observadores de la
mesopelágicos
peso promedio de muchas fuentes (M. CIAT y estimaciones de B
Scott, com. pers.)5. Obtener detalles
de autores

Estudios de transectos de bandas
(1989-90)1,3

Biomasa
(toneladas·millón km-2)

Aves de caza

Componente

Polovina (1984), Opitz (1996)

Supuesto ser comparable con
marsopa de Dall (Pauly y
Christensen 1996)

Promedio ponderado por
biomasa para ballenas
Mesoplodon spp. y zifio de
Cuvier, orcas, y cachalotes de
Pauly y Christensen (1996)2;
reducido para balance de masas3
Supuesto ser comparable con
marsopa de Dall (Pauly y
Christensen 1996)

De Yochem y Leatherwood
(1985), Pauly y Christensen
(1996), y Trites et al. (1999)

Se supuso una cantidad “medi- Márquez (1990)2, P. Dutton (com.
ana” de producción consumida pers.)3,6
por depredación2; reducida
debido a estimación excesiva de
depredación y captura incidental
baja3

Datos inéditos de contenido
estomacal (CIAT)

Ajustado de Pauly y Christensen
(1996)

Valor bajo debido a baja
L. Ballance (com. pers.)1
depredación en el POT2; este
supuesto descartado tras obtener
estimación de B y estimamos EE
en Ecopath3
Promedio ponderado por biomasa
para ballenas azul (Yochem y
Leatherwood 1985, Pauly y
Christensen 1996) y de Bryde
(Yochem y Leatherwood 1985)

Escalado a partir del Q/B de
Aves de caza2 (Flint y Nagy
1984)2; L. Ballance (com.
pers.)3

Dieta

Ballance y Pitman (1999); L.
Valor bajo debido a baja
Ballance (com. pers.)1
depredación en el POT2; este
supuesto descartado tras obtener
estimación de B y estimamos EE
en Ecopath3

EE

De Flint y Nagy
Muck
y Pauly (1987)2, Ballance
2
(1995) , L. Ballance (com.
pers.)1,3

(1984)2,

Q/B (año-1)

TABLA 4b. Fuentes y supuestos de las estimaciones de parámetros de Ecopath y de composición de dietas para el modelo del ecosistema pelágico del POT. En casos de referencias múltiples, a
menudo usamos un valor promedio (basado en un valor por referencia) en el modelo. Las notas 2 y 3 identifican fuentes de información para las estimaciones iniciales (ETP1) y modificadas (ETP7).

168
OLSON AND WATTERS

Biomasa
(toneladas·millón km-2)
P/B (año-1)

8

Dorado grande

8

Supuesto ser comparable con
el atún aleta amarilla con base
en tasas metabólicas estándar
comparables (Brill 1996)2; estimación modificada de Olson y
Galván-Magaña (2002)3

Supuesto ser igual que
Marlines grandes y Pez vela
grande

M de Boggs (1989), y estimada de
regresiones sobre K, L , y temperatura in Pauly (1980), datos de
Boggs (1989); supusimos F = M
porque capturas en el OPO han sido
estables (Hinton y Bayliff 2002)
M promedio de la Tabla 3.7 de Opitz
(1996) basado en Pauly (1980), F
supuesto ser 02; supusimos F =
0.5M3

Pez espada
grande4

Pez vela grande

M estimada de regresiones sobre K,
L , y temperatura en Pauly (1980),
datos de Boggs (1989) para 3 especies;
supusimos que F = M ya que capturas
han sido estables3

Escalado a partir del Q/B de
aleta amarilla basado en diferencias en tamaño del cuerpo y
promediado para tres especies2;
reducido más porque marlines,
a diferencia del atún aleta amarilla, no son de cuerpo cálido3
M estimado de regresiones sobre K, Escalado a partir del Q/B de
L , y temperatura en Pauly (1980), aleta amarilla basado en diferdatos de Boggs (1989) para Pacífico y encias en tamaño del cuerpo2;
Atlántico; supusimos F = 2M debido reducido más porque pez vela, a
a disminución de descargas2;
diferencia del atún aleta amarsupuesto modificado: F = M basado illa, no son de cuerpo cálido3
en pesquería de alta mar y distribución costera del pez vela3

De Yabe et al. (1959), de Sylva
(1962), y Stillwell y Kohler
(1985), Hernández-García (1995),
Markaida y Sosa-Nishizaki (1998)

Datos inéditos de contenido
estomacal (CIAT)

Alto valor supuesto debido a
De Olson y Galván-Magaña
supuesto erróneo que la mayor (2002)
parte de la producción es utilizada en el ecosistema2; EE bajo
supuesto basado en supuesto que
F < M3, 7

Alto valor supuesto debido a
supuesto erróneo que la mayor
parte de la producción es utilizada en el ecosistema2; supusimos
que F = M ya que capturas han
disminuido en años recientes
pero la pesca se ha desplazado
mar afuera, por lo que supusimos EE baja3, 7
Basado en supuesto que F = M,
pero es capturado principalmente en el extremo norte del
área del modelo7

Alto valor supuesto debido a
Datos inéditos de contenido
supuesto erróneo que la mayor estomacal (CIAT)
parte de la producción es utilizada en el ecosistema2; supusimos
que F = M ya que capturas han
sido estables3, 7

Promedios geométricos de Juhl
(1955), King y Ikehara (1956), y
Blunt (1960)

Escalado a partir del Q/B de
aleta amarilla basado en mayor
tamaño del cuerpo

Dieta
Datos inéditos de contenido
estomacal (CIAT)

EE

Estimaciones de bioenergética
(Olson y Boggs 1986), costo de
reproducción corregido de
Schaefer (1998)

Q/B (año-1)

Marlines grandes

Atún aleta amar- Evaluaciones de población de la CIAT M de promedio ponderado por abunilla grande
(adaptado de CIAT 1998, CIAT
dancia de vectores de M por edad; F
1999a)
de estimación de biomasa y captura a
edad multiplicados por peso promedio (evaluaciones de poblaciones de
la CIAT, adaptado de CIAT 1998,
CIAT 1999a)
Evaluaciones de población de la CIAT M de evaluaciones de población de la
Atún patudo
(adaptado de CIAT 1998, CIAT
CIAT; F de rendimiento estimado
grande
1999a)
dividido por B estimada (adaptado de
CIAT 1998, CIAT 1999a)

Componente

TABLA 4b. (continuación)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
169

8

Biomasa
(toneladas·millón km-2)

Albacora4

Atún barrilete

Rayas

Tiburones grandes

CPUE (toneladas/lance) de base
de datos de observadores de la
CIAT dividida por q por tamaño
y tipo de lance estimado para
atún aleta amarilla

CPUE (toneladas/lance) de base
de datos de observadores de la
CIAT dividida por q por tamaño
y tipo de lance estimado para
atún aleta amarilla
CPUE (toneladas/lance) de base
de datos de observadores de la
CIAT dividida por q por tamaño
y tipo de lance estimado para
atún aleta amarilla

De Hampton y Fournier (2000)

Vive en la capa epipelágica como Supuesto ser comparable con
el atún aleta amarilla (Laurs et Peces picudos pequeños y Peto
al. 1982). A partir de la composición por tamaño de capturas
palangreras japonesas, se estimó
Q/B como el promedio de los Q/B
de atún aleta amarilla grande y
pequeño

De Kitchell et al. (1978)

De Pinkas et al. (1971), Murray
(1994), Froese y Pauly (2000)

Alto valor debido a supuesto que la Datos inéditos de contenido
mayor parte de la producción esu- estomacal (CIAT)
sada por depredadores y canibalismo2; ajustado a nivel menor con
base en supuesto que F<<M ya
que se considera subexplotado3, 7

De Bigelow y Schroeder (1953),
Notarbartolo-di-Sciara (1988)

M promedio supuesta ser comparable
con la de Tiburones grandes; F de
rendimiento estimado (datos de
observadores de la CIAT) dividido
por B estimado
M de análisis de rendimiento por
recluta (CIAT 1998); F promedio a
edad (Tomlinson, com. pers.)9
Supuesto ser la mitad de aquel
de Tiburones grandes con base
en supuesto de actividad
menor

Datos inéditos de contenido
estomacal (CIAT)

Basado en datos de Carangidae y
Gempylidae de FishBase (Froese
y Pauly 2000) y datos inéditos de
la CIAT; barrilete negro de
Yoshida (1979) y datos inéditos de
la CIAT

M promedio para 5 especies de Smith Supuesto ser comparable con
et al. (1998); F de rendimiento esti- tiburón galano (de Cortés 1997)
mado (datos de observadores de la
CIAT) dividido por B estimado

Alto valor debido a supuesto que
la mayor parte de la producción
es usada por depredadores y
canibalismo3

Dieta

Datos inéditos de contenido
estomacal (CIAT)

Estimación inicial: promedio
para especie pertinente >5kg
de Opitz (1996, Anexo 8.7)2;
estimación modificada para
todos tamaños (Opitz 1996,
Anexo 8.7)3

M promedio para varias especies estimada de regresiones sobre K, L , y
temperatura en Pauly (1980), datos
de FishBase (Froese y Pauly 2000) y
Opitz (1996)

EE

Supuesto ser comparable con Dorado Supuesto ser comparable con
grande
Pez vela pequeño

Q/B (año-1)

P/B (año-1)

8

Peto grande4

Piscívoros misceláneos CPUE (toneladas/lance) de base
grandes8
de datos de observadores de la
CIAT dividida por q por tamaño y
tipo de lance estimado para atún
aleta amarilla2; tras excluir peto
y combinar Piscívoros misc.
grandes y pequeños especificamos
EE y estimamos B en Ecopath3

Componente

TABLA 4b. (continuación)

170
OLSON AND WATTERS

Evaluaciones de poblaciones de
la CIAT (adaptado de CIAT
1998, CIAT 1999a)

Estimación bioenergética de producción debida a depredación
por atún aleta amarilla (Olson y
Boggs 1986) dividida por estimación de P/B2; depredación por
otros depredadores mayores
desconocida, por lo que insertamos EE y estimamos B en
Ecopath3
Abundancias medias por pesos
medios de 1966-82 (Bayliff 1993,
Bayliff 1994, (CIAT 1999a)

Biomasa
(toneladas·millón km-2)

Pez vela pequeño

Marlines pequeños

Atún patudo pequeño Evaluaciones de poblaciones de
la CIAT (adaptado de CIAT
1998, CIAT 1999a)

Atún aleta amarilla
pequeño

Atún aleta azul4

Auxis spp.

Componente

TABLA 4b. (continuación)
EE
Dieta

Alto valor supuesto debido a
De Nakamura (1985)
supuesto erróneo que la mayor
parte de la producción es utilizada en el ecosistema2; reducido
porque explotación no tan alta EE supuesto es 0.25 mayor que
el de Marlines grandes3, 7
Alto valor supuesto debido a
De Nakamura (1985)
supuesto erróneo que la mayor
parte de la producción es utilizada en el ecosistema2; reducido
porque explotación no tan alta EE supuesto es 0.25 mayor que
el de Marlines grandes3, 7

Datos inéditos de contenido
estomacal (CIAT)

Datos inéditos de contenido
estomacal (CIAT)

De Pinkas et al. (1971)10

Supuesto ser comparable con Se supuso que una gran propor- De Okada (1955), Tester y
aquel de atún barrilete2; Q/B de ción de la producción es consum- Nakamura (1957) , Yokota et al.
barrilete reducido en proporida por depredadores3
(1961), Whitley (1964)
ción a diferencia en tamaño de
cuerpo usando cociente Aleta
amarilla pequeño/Aleta amarilla grande3

Q/B (año-1)

Supuesto ser 30% menor que el
de aleta amarilla pequeño con
base en tasa de crecimiento
menor y temperaturas preferidas más bajas
M de promedio de vectores de M por Estimaciones de bioenergética
edad; F de estimación de biomasa y (Olson y Boggs 1986), costo de
captura a edad multiplicados por
reproducción corregido de
peso promedio (adaptado de CIAT
Schaefer (1998)
1998, CIAT 1999a)
M de evaluaciones de poblaciones de Q/B de aleta amarilla reducido
la CIAT; F de rendimiento estimado con base en mayor tamaño del
dividido por B estimado (adaptado de cuerpo de patudo
CIAT 1998, CIAT 1999a)
M estimada de regresiones sobre K, Q/B de aleta amarilla reducido
L , y temperatura en Pauly (1980), con base en diferencias en
datos de Boggs (1989) para 3
tamaño del cuerpo y promediaespecies; estimamos F reduciendo F do para 3 especies2; reducido
de Marlines grandes por el cociente aun más porque marlines, a
de descartes de Marlines pequeños a diferencia del atún aleta amardescargas de Marlines grandes
illa, no son de cuerpo cálido3
M estimada de regresiones sobre K, Q/B de aleta amarilla reducido
L , y temperatura en Pauly (1980), con base en diferencias en
datos de Boggs (1989) para Pacífico y tamaño del cuerpo2; reducido
Atlántico; estimamos F reduciendo F aun más porque pez vela, a
de Pez vela grande por el cociente de diferencia del atún aleta amardescartes artes de Pez vela pequeño illa, no es de cuerpo cálido3
a descargas de Pez vela grande

Z (F+M) promedio ponderado por
biomasa (Bayliff 1993, Bayliff 1994,
CIAT 1999a)

M supuesta ser comparable con atún
barrilete (evaluaciones de poblaciones de la CIAT) y F muy bajo con
base en rendimiento y biomasa2;
incrementado para balancear demanda de depredación3

P/B (año-1)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
171

8

8

Peces voladores

Anchoas

De Olson y Galván-Magaña
(2002)

De Yabe et al. (1959)

Estimaciones de densidad de
M promedio de 3 especies del Océano
transectos lineales (Oxenford et Pacífico occidental (Dalzell 1993)
al. 1995) extrapolados al área del
modelo del POT y multiplicadas
por estimación del peso medio
(Campana et al. 1993)2; evaluamos el supuesto de nuevo y
especificamos EE, estimando B
en Ecopath3

Dieta

Datos inéditos de contenido
estomacal (CIAT)

Alto valor basado en supuesto
De Manooch y Hogarth (1983)
que la mayor parte de la producciónes usada por depredadores y
canibalismo2; evaluamos
supuesto de nuevo y añadimos
0.25 a la EE de la estimación
previa3

Supuesto ser igual que para
Marlines pequeños y Pez vela
pequeño

EE

Calculado de estimaciones del Alto valor basado en supuesto
De Lewis (1961), Gorelova (1980),
metabolismo total (Belokopytin que la mayor parte de la produc- Lipskaya (1980), y Lipskaya
3
y Abolmasova 1988) promedia- ción es usada por depredadores (1987)
do con estimaciones de
raciones(Gorelova 1980,
Lipskaya 1980 Lipskaya 1987)
y reducido 25% porque las estimaciones se basan en peces
pequeños

Omitidas porque la depredación sobre anchoas ocurre principalmente en zonas costeras, no representadas adecuadamente por el modelo.
Anchoas incluidas en Peces epipelágicos misceláneos

Supuesto ser 1.25 veces el Q/B
de Tiburones grandes con base
en tamaño menor del cuerpo2;
ajustado a 1.17 veces el Q/B de
Tiburones grandes usando
cociente Aleta amarilla
grande/Aleta amarilla pequeño3

M promedio de 4 especies de Smith
et al. (1998); F de rendimiento estimado (datos de observadores de la
CIAT) dividido por B estimada2

Tiburones pequeños

CPUE (toneladas/lance) de base
de datos de observadores de la
CIAT dividida por q por tamaño
y tipo de lance estimado para
atún aleta amarilla2

Supuesto ser comparable con
Dorado pequeño y Aleta amarilla pequeño2; Q/B de Aleta
amarilla pequeño reducido en
misma proporción Q/B que Peto
grande/Atún aleta amarilla
grande3

Supuesto ser más bajo que P/B de
Barrilete porque Peto es de mayor
tamaño y vida más larga

Ver Piscívoros misceláneos grandes

Supuesto ser igual que para
Aleta amarilla pequeño con
base en tasas metabólicas
estándar similares2; de Olson y
Galván-Magaña (2002)3

Peto pequeño4

Piscívoros misceláneos
pequeños8

CPUE (toneladas/lance) de base
de datos de observadores de la
CIAT dividida por q por tamaño
y tipo de lance estimado para
atún aleta amarilla2; incrementado para balancear alta demanda de depredación3

M promedio de Tabla 3.7 de Opitz
(1996) basada en Pauly (1980), F
estimada de estimaciones de
rendimiento y biomasa2; incrementado para balancear porque M de la literatura podría ser para peces
grandes3

Q/B (año-1)

Dorado pequeño

P/B (año-1)
M estimada de regresiones sobre K, Supuesto ser igual que para
L , y temperatura en Pauly (1980), Marlines pequeños
datos de Boggs (1989); estimamos F
reduciendo F de Pez espada grande
por el cociente de descartes de Pez
espada pequeño a descargas de Pez
espada grande

Biomasa
(toneladas·millón km-2)
8

Pez espada pequeño4

Componente

TABLA 4b. (continuación)

172
OLSON AND WATTERS

Mesozooplancton12

Cefalópodos
mesopelágicos11
Cangrejos

Cefalópodos
epipelágicos11

Peces mesopelágicos
misceláneos

Peces epipelágicos
misceláneos

Componente

Estimado del extremo superior
del rango de densidad en
Longhurst y Pauly (1987)

Biomasa
(toneladas·millón km-2)

TABLA 4b. (continuación)
Q/B (año-1)
EE
Dieta

Z de la curva de captura ajustado a Supusimos (para Pleuroncodes
datos del muestreo de poblaciones en planipes) punto medio del rango
de raciones diarias para nueve
el mar de Blackburn (1977)
especies de crustáceos decápodos
(de Maynou y Cartes 1998)2;
modificado para corregir error
en conversión de peso seco a
peso húmedo3
Promedio de zooplancton carnívoro Supuesto ser 0.5*Q/B de zooplancton herbívoro porque P/B
de Longhurst y Pauly (1987)2; de
de zooplancton carnívoro la
Chai et al. (2002, Fig. 7)3
mitad de aquel de zooplancton
herb.2; De Vinogradov et al.
(1976), Ikeda (1977), Dam et al.
(1995), Chavez et al. (1996),
Verity et al. (1996)3

Supusimos que una cantidad
De Longhurst y Pauly (1987,
“mediana” de producción se con- Tabla 4.3); de Chai et al. (2002,
2
vierte en detritos ; flujo
Fig. 7)3
entrante/flujo saliente ajustado
por proporción reciclada (de
Chai et al. 2002, Fig. 7)3

Supusimos que una cantidad
De Aurioles-Gamboa (1977)
“mediana” de producción se con2
vierte en detritos ; ajustado
hacia arriba para ser consistente
con otras especies de forraje3

Ver Cefalópodos epipelágicos. Se combinaron con Cefalópodos mesopelágicos11.

Supusimos que 80% de la proDe información sobre varias
ducción es consumida por
especies en FishBase (Froese y
depredadores2; modificado
Pauly 2000)
suponiendo que 95% es consumido por depredadores (consistente
con otros peces de forraje, por
ejemplo Auxis spp.3)
De Longhurst y Pauly (1987, p. 255) Supuesto ser comparable con
Supusimos que la dieta consiste
Q/B de Peces epipelágicos misde mesozooplancton y microzooceláneos
plancton solamente
Promedio de dos estimaciones de M Promedio de dos especies de
Alto valor basado en supuesto
De Ehrhardt (1983), Nixon
de Ehrhardt (1983) y dos estimaLonghurst y Pauly (1987)2;
que la mayor parte de la produc- (1987), Ehrhardt (1991), y
ciones de Longhurst y Pauly (1987)2; reducido porque canibalismo
ción es usada por depredadores2; Schetinnikov (1992)
incrementado para balancear alta
demasiado alto para balancear reducido para tomar en cuenta
demanda de depredación3
con producción de zooplancton migraciones verticales diurnas a
capas mesopelágicas, ausencia de
pesca sobre cefalópodos en el
modelo, y componente subestimado de cefalópodos en la dieta
de depredadores3

Estimaciones promediadas de M para Estimaciones promediadas para
muchas especies de FishBase (Froese muchas especies de Opitz
y Pauly 2000) y Opitz (1996) supusi- (1996, Anexo 8.7)
mos que F = M con base en falta de
evidencia de disminución de
descartes en últimos 5 años

P/B (año-1)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
173

Promedios de Polovina (1984) y
No aplicable
Valiela (1984)2; de Chai et al. (2002,
Fig. 7)3

Fitoplancton grande13

12
13

11

9
10

8

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

Dieta

No aplicable

De Longhurst y Pauly (1987,
Tabla 4.3); de Chai et al. (2002,
Fig. 7)3

Cociente de flujo entrante a flujo No aplicable
saliente ajustado por proporción
reciclada (de Chai et al. 2002,
Fig. 7)3

Supusimos que una cantidad
“mediana” de producción se convierte en detritos2; flujo
entrante/flujo saliente ajustado
por proporión reciclada (de Chai
et al. 2002, Fig. 7)3
Estimado de tasas de sedimentación a profundidad (de
Valiela 1984) interpoladas a 1000
m; flujo entrante/flujo saliente
ajustado por proporción reciclada (de Chai et al. 2002, Fig. 7)3

EE

L. Ballance, NOAA, NMFS, La Jolla, California, EE.UU.
Estimaciones iniciales de los parámetros (ETP1).
Estimaciones modificadas de los parámetros (ETP7).
No se incluyó este componente en el modelo original (ETP1), sino que fue añadido durante las modificaciones (ETP2-ETP7).
M. Scott, CIAT, La Jolla, California, EE.UU.
P. Dutton, NOAA, NMFS, La Jolla, California, EE.UU.
Asignamos EE a este componente con base en nuestros supuestos sobre la magnitud relativa de F y M. Si se supuso que F era bajo con respecto a M, asignamos un EE bajo. Si se supuso que
F era aproximadamente igual a M, asignamos EE = 0.5. Si se supuso que F era alto con respecto a M, asignamos un EE alto.
Los componentes originales de Piscívoros misceláneos grandes y pequeños fueron combinados en Piscívoros misceláneos. El componente de Piscívoros misceláneos original incluía peto, pero
lo sacamos por sus diferencias de las demás especies en este componente.
P. Tomlinson, CIAT, La Jolla, California, EE.UU.
Para los depredadores que comen atún aleta azul del Pacífico (PBT) en el Pacífico oriental (OPO), dividimos la contribución de PBT a su dieta por 3 (suponiendo que PBT está en el OPO cuatro meses del año) y multiplicamos por 0.07 (suponiendo que PBT y otros componentes se solapan en el 7% del área del modelo).
Componentes iniciales; fueron combinadas como Cefalópodos porque su producción no pudo balancear demandas de canibalismo entre estos componentes. Se supuso que P/B y Q/B eran comparables para ambos componentes.
Hubo solamente un componente de Zooplancton en ETP1. Lo dividimos por tamaño en dos componentes, de conformidad con Chai et al. (2002).
Hubo solamente un componente de Productores en ETP1. Lo dividimos por tamaño en dos componentes, de conformidad con Chai et al. (2002).

Productores
pequeños13

No aplicable

De Polovina (1984)2; de
Vinogradov et al. (1976), Ikeda
(1977), Dam et al. (1995),
Chavez et al. (1996), Verity et
al. (1996)3

Promedio de zooplancton herbívoro
de Longhurst y Pauly (1987)2; de
Chai et al. (2002, Fig. 7)3

Microzooplancton12

De Chai et al. (2002, Fig. 7)3

Q/B (año-1)

Componente

P/B (año-1)

Biomasa
(toneladas·millón km-2)

TABLA 4b. (continuación)

174
OLSON AND WATTERS

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

175

TABLE 5a. Estimates of fisheries landings (tons per million km2 per year) by gear and purse-seine fishing
method. The landings were averaged over 1993-1997.
Component
Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Baleen whales
Toothed whales
Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins
Sea turtles
Large yellowfin tuna
Large bigeye tuna
Large marlins
Large sailfish
Large swordfish
Large dorado
Large wahoo
Large sharks
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Albacore
Auxis spp.
Bluefin tuna
Small yellowfin tuna
Small bigeye tuna
Small marlins
Small sailfish
Small swordfish
Small dorado
Small wahoo
Small sharks
Miscellaneous piscivores
Flyingfishes
Misc. epipelagic fishes
Misc. mesopelagic fishes
Cephalopods
Crabs
Total

Longliners

520.00
1,500.00
280.00
14.00
10.92
0.06
45.00
22.23
7.40
67.00
441.87
0.57
0.17

Baitboats

Total

990.00
56.00

250.00
560.00

3,600.00
0.77

0.01

0.01

<0.01

0.16
1.30

1.90
1.30

<0.01
0.16

140.00

1,200.00

2,000.00

91.00

110.00
5.10

44.94
1,400.00
25.00

0.03
380.00
420.00

780.00
0.20

5,360.00
2,126.77
280.00
14.00
10.95
0.06
47.06
24.99
7.40
3,498.00
441.87
0.57
45.14
2,670.00
450.30

0.00
0.14
0.40
0.32
18.00

4.10
0.34
0.57
100.00

0.01
0.04
0.40

3.64
4.24
0.75
0.93
118.40

3,736.27

3,718.25

4,472.59

15,105.07

10.00

3.64

2,912.86

Purse-seine set type
Unasso- FloatingDolphin
ciated
object

265.10

176

OLSON AND WATTERS

TABLA 5b. Estimaciones de las descargas en las pesquerías (toneladas anuales por millón de km2) por arte
de pesca y modalidad cerquera. Las descargas son los promedios de 1993-1997.
Componente

Palangreros

Aves de caza
Aves forrajeras
Ballenas barbadas
Ballenas dentadas
Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos
Tortugas marinas
Atún aleta amarilla grande
520.00
Atún patudo grande
1,500.00
Marlines grandes
280.00
Pez vela grande
14.00
Pez espada grande
10.92
Dorado grande
0.06
Peto grande
45.00
Tiburones grandes
22.23
Rayas
7.40
Atún barrilete
67.00
Albacora
441.87
Auxis spp.
0.57
Atún aleta azul
0.17
Atún aleta amarilla pequeño
Atún patudo pequeño
Marlines pequeños
Pez vela pequeño
Pez espada pequeño
3.64
Dorado pequeño
Peto pequeño
Tiburones pequeños
Piscívoros misceláneos
Peces voladores
Peces epipelágicos misceláneos
Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos
Cefalópodos
Cangrejos
Total
2,912.86

Barcos de
carnada

Tipo de lance cerquero
No
Objeto
Delfín
asociado flotante

Total

990.00
56.00

250.00
560.00

3,600.00
0.77

0.01

0.01

<0.01

0.16
1.30

1.90
1.30

<0.01
0.16

140.00

1,200.00

2,000.00

91.00

110.00
5.10

44.94
1,400.00
25.00

0.03
380.00
420.00

780.00
0.20

5,360.00
2,126.77
280.00
14.00
10.95
0.06
47.06
24.99
7.40
3,498.00
441.87
0.57
45.14
2,670.00
450.30

0.00
0.14
0.40
0.32
18.00

4.10
0.34
0.57
100.00

0.01
0.04
0.40

3.64
4.24
0.75
0.93
118.40

3,736.27

3,718.25

4,472.59

15,105.07

10.00

265.10

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

177

TABLE 6a. Estimates of fisheries discards (tons per million km2 per year) by gear and purse-seine fishing
method. The discards were averaged over 1993-1997.
Component
Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Baleen whales
Toothed whales
Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins
Sea turtles
Large yellowfin tuna
Large bigeye tuna
Large marlins
Large sailfish
Large swordfish
Large dorado
Large wahoo
Large sharks
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Albacore
Auxis spp.
Bluefin tuna
Small yellowfin tuna
Small bigeye tuna
Small marlins
Small sailfish
Small swordfish
Small dorado
Small wahoo
Small sharks
Miscellaneous piscivores
Flyingfishes
Misc. epipelagic fishes
Misc. mesopelagic fishes
Cephalopods
Crabs
Total

Longliners

Baitboats

0.64

0.01
0.02

4.70
14.00
0.14
0.02

72.35

91.88

0.03

0.03

Purse-seine set type
Unasso- FloatingDolphin
ciated
object

Total

0.17
3.00
2.50
0.79

0.04

0.08

0.17
3.00
2.50
0.03

1.80
0.67

4.20
0.05

0.46
0.29

6.46
1.01

1.90
16.00
11.00
30.00

26.00
18.00
0.35
540.00

0.03
2.30
2.00
4.90

27.93
36.30
13.36
574.92

38.00

38.00

0.41

76.41

24.00
0.73
0.01
0.02

110.00
110.00
0.01

3.00
0.01
0.01

141.70
124.74
0.16
0.05

1.80
5.30
3.60
18.00

55.00
5.40
7.20
100.00

0.05
0.15
0.62
0.40

56.85
10.85
83.80
118.40

0.60

10.00

0.13

10.73

153.47

1,024.29

20.46

1,290.13

178

OLSON AND WATTERS

TABLA 6b. Estimaciones de los descartes en las pesquerías (toneladas anuales por millón de km2) por arte
de pesca y modalidad cerquera. Las descargas son los promedios de 1993-1997.

Componente

Palangreros

Aves de caza
Aves forrajeras
Ballenas barbadas
Ballenas dentadas
Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos
Tortugas marinas
0.64
Atún aleta amarilla grande
Atún patudo grande
Marlines grandes
Pez vela grande
Pez espada grande
Dorado grande
Peto grande
Tiburones grandes
Rayas
0.01
Atún barrilete
0.02
Albacora
Auxis spp.
Atún aleta azul
Atún aleta amarilla pequeño
4.70
Atún patudo pequeño
14.00
Marlines pequeños
0.14
Pez vela pequeño
0.02
Pez espada pequeño
Dorado pequeño
Peto pequeño
Tiburones pequeños
72.35
Piscívoros misceláneos
Peces voladores
Peces epipelágicos misceláneos
Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos
Cefalópodos
Cangrejos
Total
91.88

Barcos de
carnada

0.03

0.03

Tipo de lance cerquero
No
Objeto
asociado flotante

Delfín

Total

0.04

0.08

0.17
3.00
2.50
0.03

0.17
3.00
2.50
0.79

1.80
0.67

4.20
0.05

0.46
0.29

6.46
1.01

1.90
16.00
11.00
30.00

26.00
18.00
0.35
540.00

0.03
2.30
2.00
4.90

27.93
36.30
13.36
574.92

38.00

38.00

0.41

76.41

24.00
0.73
0.01
0.02

110.00
110.00
0.01

3.00
0.01
0.01

141.70
124.74
0.16
0.05

1.80
5.30
3.60
18.00

55.00
5.40
7.20
100.00

0.05
0.15
0.62
0.40

56.85
10.85
83.80
118.40

0.60

10.00

0.13

10.73

153.47

1,024.29

20.46

1,290.13

Min. time in small component
(relative to default duration)
Max. time in small component
(relative to default duration)
Recruitment power parameter
Age (years) at transition to
large component(tk)
Wavg/Wk (Avg. weight of large
component/weight at transition)
K of von Bertalanffy growth
function (yr−1)
Base proportion of food intake
used for reproduction
Proportion of increase in food
intake used for growth

Small component
Large component
1.00
1.0001
1.0
1.93
2.9
0.30
0.48
0.8

1.00

1.0001
1.0

1.80

1.5

0.32

0.48

0.8

0.8

0.58

0.24

2.7

2.08

1.0001
1.0

1.00

0.8

0.58

0.47

1.5

2.20

1.0001
1.0

1.00

Small yellowfin Small bigeye Small marlins Small sailfish
Large yellowfin Large bigeye Large marlins Large sailfish

0.8

0.58

0.12

1.9

4.27

1.0001
1.0

1.00

0.8

0.58

1.28

2.9

0.66

1.0001
1.0

1.00

0.8

0.48

0.30

2.6

1.25

1.0001
1.0

1.00

0.8

0.58

0.15

1.9

4.57

1.0001
1.0

1.00

Small swordfish Small dorado Small wahoo Small sharks
Large swordfish Large dorado Large wahoo Large sharks

TABLE 7a. Ontogenetic transition parameters for groups with split pools in the pelagic ecosystem model of the ETP.

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
179

Aleta amarilla
pequeño
Aleta amarilla
grande

Tiempo mínimo en componente
pequeño (relativo a duración base)
1.00
Tiempo máximo en componente
pequeño (relativo a duración base)
1.0001
Parámetro de potencia
del reclutamiento
1.0
Edad (años) de transición al
componente grande (tk)
1.80
Wavg/Wk (Peso medio del componente
grande/peso de transición)
1.5
K de la función de crecimiento de
von Bertalanffy (yr−1)
0.32
Proporción básica de consumo de
alimento usada para reproducción
0.48
Proporción del aumento en consumo
de alimento usada para crecimiento
0.8

Componente grande

Componente pequeño

1.00
1.0001
1.0
2.08
2.7
0.24
0.58
0.8

1.0001
1.0
1.93
2.9
0.30
0.48
0.8

Marlines
pequeño
Marlines
grande

1.00

Patudo
pequeño
Patudo
grande

0.8

0.58

0.47

1.5

2.20

1.0

1.0001

1.00

Pez vela
pequeño
Pez vela
grande

0.8

0.58

0.12

1.9

4.27

1.0

1.0001

1.00

Pez espada
pequeño
Pez espada
grande

TABLA 7b. Parámetros de transición ontogénica para componentes divididos en el modelo del ecosistema pelágico del POT.

0.8

0.58

1.28

2.9

0.66

1.0

1.0001

1.00

Dorado
pequeño
Dorado
grande

0.8

0.48

0.30

2.6

1.25

1.0

1.0001

1.00

Peto
pequeño
Peto
grande

0.8

0.58

0.15

1.9

4.57

1.0

1.0001

1.00

Tiburones
pequeño
Tiburones
grande

180
OLSON AND WATTERS

Assumed linear relationship between
batch fecundity and
biomass, as evidenced
for yellowfin tuna

Estimated visually from
plots of length at age
from growth functions
(Koto 1963, Skillman and
Yong 1976, Boggs
1989)2. Default values
recommended by
Christensen et al. (2000)3

Marlins
Average age of 150-cm
fish based on fitted von B.
equation to predictions
from von B. growth functions for male and female
striped marlin and male
and female blue marlin
(see references two
columns to right)

Average age of 80-cm fish
based on fitted von B.
equation to predictions
from several von B.
growth functions for bigeye (see references two
columns to right)

Assumed 1.0 to repre- Average age of 90-cm fish
sent linear relation(Wild 1986)
ship between batch
fecundity and biomass
(Schaefer 1998: Fig.
16)

Assumed linear relationship between
batch fecundity and
biomass, as evidenced
for yellowfin tuna

Estimated visually from
plot of length at age
(Wild 1986: Fig. 4)2.
Default values recommended by Christensen
et al. (2000)3

Recruitment power Age (years) at transition
parameter
to large group (tk)

Bigeye tuna Estimated visually from
plot of length at age
(Kume and Joseph 1966:
Fig. 9)2. Default values
recommended by
Christensen et al. (2000)3

Yellowfin
tuna

Min. and Max. time in
Group with
small group (relative to
split pools
default duration)

Computed using artificial
cohort with Z’s based on
P/B ratios (Table 2a), mean
of predictions from
weight/length relationships
(Skillman and Yong 1974,
Wares and Sakagawa 1974),
and growth parameters (see
next column)

Computed using artificial
cohort with Z's based on
P/B ratios (Table 2a), mean
of predictions from
weight/length relationships
(Nakamura and Uchiyama
1966, Morita 1973), and
growth parameters (see
next column)

Base proportion of
food intake used for
reproduction1

Cost of spawning of
females and males
(Schaefer 1996, Schaefer
1998), cost of growth
(Olson and Boggs 1986).
Proportions weighted by
geometric mean sex
ratios (0.785:0.215
males:females) based on
stock assessments
(Maunder and Watters
2001).
K of fitted von B. equa- Assumed same as for
tion to predictions from yellowfin tuna
several von B. growth
functions for bigeye
(after Shomura and
Keala 1963, Yukinawa
and Yabuta 1963, Kume
and Joseph 1966, Suda
and Kume 1967,
Hampton et al. 1998)
K of fitted von B. equa- Since sex ratios of these
tion to predictions from species are skewed
von B. growth functions opposite those of yelfor male and female
lowfin tuna (more
striped marlin (after
females than males)
Skillman and Yong 1976, (Nakamura 1985), we
model 1, Boggs 1989
assumed yellowfin sex
after Koto 1963) and
ratios and relative
male and female blue
spawning costs are
marlin (after Skillman exactly opposite for
and Yong 1976, model 1) marlins

K of von Bertalanffy
growth function (yr-1)

Computed using artificial
Adapted from Wild
cohort with Z’s based on
(1986)
P/B ratios (Table 2a), mean
of predictions from
weight/length relationships
(Morita 1973, Wild 1986),
and growth parameters
(Wild 1986)

Wavg/Wk (Avg. weight of
large group/weight at
transition)

Default value recommended by Christensen
et al. (2000)

Default value recommended by Christensen
et al. (2000)

Default value recommended by Christensen
et al. (2000)

Proportion of increase
in food intake
used for growth

TABLE 8a. Sources and assumptions of the ontogenetic parameter estimates for taxa with split pools in the pelagic ecosystem model of the ETP. Information sources for the initial (ETP1) and
revised (ETP7) estimates are identified by footnotes 2 and 3.

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
181

Dorado

Assumed linear relationship between
batch fecundity and
biomass, as evidenced
for yellowfin tuna

Average age of 150-cm
fish based on fitted von B.
equation to predictions
from von B. growth functions for male and female
swordfish (see references
two columns to right)

Computed using artificial
cohort with Z’s based on
P/B ratios (Table 2a),
weight/length relationships
(Skillman and Yong 1974),
and growth parameters
(see next column)

Since sex ratios are
Default value recomskewed opposite as for mended by Christensen
yellowfin tuna (Palko et et al. (2000)
al. 1982 reported more
females than males, usually) for these species, we
assumed yellowfin sex
ratios and relative
spawning costs are exactly opposite for dorado

Since sex ratios of this Default value recomspecies are skewed oppo- mended by Christensen
site those of yellowfin
et al. (2000)
tuna (more females than
males) (Nakamura 1985),
we assumed yellowfin
sex ratios and relative
spawning costs are exactly opposite for swordfish

Estimated visually from
plots of length at age
from growth functions
(Berkeley and Houde
1983, Radtke and Hurley
1983, SEFC 1987,
Uchiyama et al. 1998)2.
Default values recommended by Christensen
et al. (2000)3

K of fitted von B. equation to predictions from
von B. growth functions
for male and female
swordfish (after
Berkeley and Houde
1983, Radtke and
Hurley 1983, SEFC
1987, Boggs 1989 after
Yabe et al. 1959,
Uchiyama et al. 1998)
Estimated visually from Assumed linear rela- Average age of 90-cm fish Computed using artificial
K of fitted von B. equaplot of length at age from tionship between
based on fitted von B.
cohort with Z’s based on
tion to predictions from
growth function
batch fecundity and
equation to predictions
P/B ratios (Table 2a),
von B. growth functions
2
(Uchiyama et al. 1986) . biomass, as evidenced from von B. growth func- weight/length relationship for male and female
Default values recomfor yellowfin tuna
tions for male and female (Tester and Nakamura
Coryphaena hippurus
mended by Christensen
Coryphaena hippurus
1957), and growth parame- (after Uchiyama et al.
3
et al. (2000)
(after Uchiyama et al.
ters (see next column)
1986)
1986)

Proportion of increase
in food intake
used for growth

Swordfish

Base proportion of
food intake used for
reproduction1

Since sex ratios of this Default value recomspecies are skewed oppo- mended by Christensen
site those of yellowfin
et al. (2000)
tuna (more females than
males) (Nakamura 1985),
we assumed yellowfin
sex ratios and relative
spawning costs are exactly opposite for sailfish

Average age of 150-cm
fish (Boggs 1989 after
Koto, 1962)

K of von Bertalanffy
growth function (yr-1)

Computed using artificial
from Boggs (1989 after
cohort with Z’s based on
Koto, 1962)
P/B ratios (Table 2a), mean
of predictions from
weight/length relationships
(Skillman and Yong 1974,
Wares and Sakagawa 1974),
and growth parameters (see
next column)

Assumed linear relationship between
batch fecundity and
bimass, as evidenced
for yellowfin tuna

Wavg/Wk (Avg. weight of
large group/weight at
transition)

Assumed same as for
marlins

Recruitment power Age (years) at transition
parameter
to large group (tk)

Sailfish

Min. and Max. time in
Group with
small group (relative to
split pools
default duration)

TABLE 8a. (continued)

182
OLSON AND WATTERS

8

Assumed linear relationship between
batch fecundity and
biomass, as evidenced
for yellowfin tuna

Assumed linear relationship between
batch fecundity and
biomass, as evidenced
for yellowfin tuna

Average age of 150-cm
fish based on fitted von B.
equation to predictions
from several von B.
growth functions for several sharks (Stevens 1975,
Cailliet and Bedford 1983,
Pratt and Casey 1983, De
Crosta et al. 1984,
Branstetter 1987b,
Branstetter 1987a,
Branstetter et al. 1987,
Branstetter and Stiles
1987, Brown and Gruber
1988, Killam and Parsons
1989, Branstetter and
Musick 1994, Natanson et
al. 1995, Wintner and
Cliff 1996)

Average age of 90-cm fish,
assuming wahoo grow at
comparable rate (K) as
Scomberomorus commerson (Bertignac and Yesaki
1994) and larger L

Computed using artificial
cohort with Z’s based on
P/B ratios (Table 2a), mean
of weight/length relationships Stevens 1975, Stevens
1983, Branstetter 1987b,
Branstetter 1987a,
Branstetter et al. 1987,
Branstetter and Stiles 1987,
Branstetter and Musick
1994, Wetherbee et al.
1996), and growth parameters (see next column)

Computed using artificial
cohort with Z’s based on
P/B ratios (Table 2a),
weight/length relationship
(Iversen and Yoshida 1957),
and growth parameters (see
next column)

Wavg/Wk (Avg. weight of
large group/weight at
transition)
K of von Bertalanffy
growth function (yr-1)

Base proportion of
food intake used for
reproduction1

K of fitted von B. equation to predictions from
several von B. growth
functions for several
sharks (after Aasen
1966, Stevens 1975,
Hoenig 1979, Cailliet
and Bedford 1983, Pratt
and Casey 1983, De
Crosta et al. 1984,
Branstetter 1987b,
Branstetter 1987a,
Branstetter et al. 1987,
Branstetter and Stiles
1987, Brown and
Gruber 1988, Killam
and Parsons 1989,
Parsons 1993, Natanson
et al. 1995, Wetherbee et
al. 1996, Wintner and
Cliff 1996)

Default value recommended by Christensen
et al. (2000)

Proportion of increase
in food intake
used for growth

Since sex ratios of these Default value recomspecies are skewed
mended by Christensen
opposite those of yelet al. (2000)
lowfin tuna (more
females than males)
(Compagno 1984), we
assumed yellowfin sex
ratios and relative
spawning costs are
exactly opposite for
sharks

Assumed K comparable Assumed same as for
to Scomberomorus com- yellowfin tuna
merson (Bertignac and
Yesaki 1994)

1 Defined as the energetics cost of reproduction divided by the sum of the energetics costs of reproduction and growth.
2 Initial parameter estimates (ETP1). These values are presented in Appendix Table 3.
3 Revised parameter estimates (ETP7).

Estimated visually from
plot of length at age
(Bertignac and Yesaki
1994). Assumed growth
comparable to
Scomberomorus commerson, except larger L 2
(IGFA 1999). Default values recommended by
Christensen et al. (2000)3
Estimated visually from
plots of length at age
(Stevens 1975, Cailliet
and Bedford 1983, Pratt
and Casey 1983, De
Crosta et al. 1984,
Branstetter 1987a,
Branstetter 1987b,
Branstetter et al. 1987,
Branstetter and Stiles
1987, Brown and Gruber
1988, Killam and Parsons
1989, Branstetter and
Musick 1994, Wintner
and Cliff 1996)2. Default
values recommended by
Christensen et al. (2000)3

Recruitment power Age (years) at transition
parameter
to large group (tk)

8

Sharks

Wahoo

Min. and Max. time in
Group with
small group (relative to
split pools
default duration)

TABLE 8a. (continued)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
183

Estimado visualmente de
gráfica de talla a edad
(Wild 1986: Fig. 4)2.
Valores base recomendados
por Christensen et al.
(2000)3

Estimado visualmente de
gráfica de talla a edad
(Kume and Joseph 1966:
Fig. 9)2. Valores base reccomendados por
Christensen et al. (2000)3

Estimado visualmente de
gráfica de talla a edad de
funciones de crecimiento
(Koto 1963, Skillman y
Yong 1976, Boggs 1989)2.
Valores base recomendados
por Christensen et al.
(2000)3

Atún aleta
amarilla

Atún patudo

Marlines

Relación lineal supuesta entre fecundidad
por camada y biomasa,
evidenciada en el caso
del atún aleta amarilla

Relación lineal supuesta entre fecundidad
por camada y biomasa,
evidenciada en el caso
del atún aleta amarilla

Computado usando cohorte Adaptado de Wild
artificial con Z basada en
(1986)
cocientes P/B (Tabla 2b),
promedio de predicciones de
relaciones peso/talla (Morita
1973, Wild 1986), y
parámetros de crecimiento
(Wild 1986)

Edad media de peces de 80
cm basada en ecuación de
von B. ajustada a predicciones de varias funciones
de crecimiento de von B.
para patudo (ver referencias dos columnas a la
derecha)

Computado usando cohorte
artificial con Z basada en
cocientes P/B (Tabla 2b),
promedio de predicciones
relaciones peso/talla
(Nakamura y Uchiyama
1966, Morita 1973), y
parámetros de crecimiento
(ver próxima columna)

Valor base recomendado
por Christensen et al.
(2000)

Valor base recomendado
por Christensen et al.
(2000)

Ya que la asimetría en las Valor base recomendado
proporciones de sexos de por Christensen et al.
estas especies es inversa (2000)
al atún aleta amarilla
(más hembras que
machos) (Nakamura
1985), supusimos que las
proporciones de sexos y
costos relativos del desove
son exactamente contrarios para marlines

Costo de desove para hembras y machos (Schaefer
1996, Schaefer (1998),
costo de crecimiento
(Olson y Boggs 1986).
Proporciones ponderadas
por proporciones de sexos
medias geométricas
(0.785:0.215 machos:hembras) basados en evaluaciones de poblaciones
(Maunder y Watters 2001).
Supuesto ser igual que
para atún aleta amarilla

Proporción de aumenK de la función de
Proporción base de con
to de consumo de alicrecmiento de von
sumo de alimento
mento usada para
Bertalanffy (yr-1) usada para reproducción1
crecimiento

K de ecuación de von
B. ajustado a predicciones de varias funciones de crecimiento
de von B. para patudo
(de Shomura y Keala
1963, Yukinawa y
Yabuta 1963, Kume y
Joseph 1966, Suda y
Kume 1967, Hampton
et al. 1998)
Computado usando cohorte K de ecuación de von
Edad media de peces de
artificial con Z basada en
B. ajustado a predic150 cm basada en
ciones de funciones de
ecuación de von B. ajusta- cocientes P/B (Tabla 2b),
da a predicciones de varias promedio de predicciones de crecimiento de von B.
para marlines rayados
funciones de crecimiento relaciones peso/talla
machos y hembras (de
de von B. para marlines (Skillman y Yong 1974,
Wares y Sakagawa 1974), y Skillman y Yong 1976,
rayados machos y hemparámetros de crecimiento modelo 1, Boggs 1989
bras y marlines azules
(ver próxima columna)
de Koto 1963) y marmachos y hembras (ver
lines azules machos y
referencias dos columnas
hembras (de Skillman
a la derecha)
y Yong 1976, modelo 1)

Supuesto que 1.0 rep- Edad media de peces de 90
resenta relación lineal cm (Wild 1986)
entre fecundidad por
camada y biomasa
(Schaefer 1998: Fig.
16)

Wavg/Wk peso medio del
Grupo con Tiempo mínimo y máximo
Parámetro de poten- Edad (años) detransición del grupo grande/peso
en grupo pequeño
componentes
)
cia
del
reclutamiento
a
grupogrande
(t
en transición)
divididos (relativa a duración base)
k

TABLA 8b. Fuentes y supuestos de las estimaciones de parámetros ontogénicos para grupos taxonómicos con componentes divididos (split pools) en el modelo del ecosistema pelágico del POT. Las
notas 2 y 3 identifican fuentes de información para las estimaciones iniciales (ETP1) y modificadas (ETP7).

184
OLSON AND WATTERS

Supuestos ser iguales que
para marlines

Estimado visualmente de
gráfica de talla a edad de
funciones de crecimiento
(Berkeley y Houde 1983,
Radtke y Hurley 1983,
SEFC 1987, Uchiyama et
al. 1998)2. Valores base
recomendados por
Christensen et al. (2000)3

Estimado visualmente de
gráfica de talla a edad de
función de crecimiento
(Uchiyama et al. 1986)2.
Valores base recomendados
por Christensen et al.
(2000)3

Pez vela

Pez espada

Dorado

Relación lineal supuesta entre fecundidad
por camada y biomasa,
evidenciada en el caso
del atún aleta amarilla

Relación lineal supuesta entre fecundidad
por camada y biomasa,
evidenciada en el caso
del atún aleta amarilla

Edad media de peces de 90
cm basada en ecuación de
von B. ajustada a predicciones de varias funciones
de crecimiento de von B.
para Coryphaena hippurus
machos y hembras (de
Uchiyama et al. 1986)

Edad media de peces de
150 cm basada en
ecuación de von B. ajustada a predicciones de varias
funciones de crecimiento
de von B. para peces espada machos y hembras (ver
referencias dos columnas
a la derecha

Relación lineal supues- Edad media de peces de
ta entre fecundidad
150 cm (Boggs 1989 de
por camada y biomasa, Koto, 1962)
evidenciada en el caso
del atún aleta amarilla

K de ecuación de von
B. ajustado a predicciones de funciones de
crecimiento de von B.
para peces espada
machos y hembras (de
Berkeley y Houde
1983, Radtke y Hurley
1983, SEFC 1987,
Boggs 1989 de Yabe et
al. 1959, Uchiyama et
al. 1998)
Computado usando cohorte K de ecuación de von
artificial con Z basada en
B. ajustado a prediccocientes P/B (Tabla 2b),
ciones de funciones de
relación peso/talla (Tester y crecimiento de von B.
Nakamura 1957), y
para Coryphaena hipparámetros de crecimiento purus machos y hem(ver próxima columna)
bras (de Uchiyama et
al. 1986)
Computado usando cohorte
artificial con Z basada en
cocientes P/B (Tabla 2b),
relación peso/talla (Skillman
y Yong 1974), y parámetros
de crecimiento (ver próxima
columna)

Valor base recomendado
por Christensen et al.
(2000)

Valor base recomendado
por Christensen et al.
(2000)

Ya que la asimetría en las Valor base recomendado
proporciones de sexos de por Christensen et al.
estas especies es inversa (2000)
al atún aleta amarilla
(Palko et al. 1982 reportaron más hembras que
machos, generalmente),
supusimos que las proporciones de sexos y costos
relativos del desove son
exactamente contrarios
para el dorado

Ya que la asimetría en las
proporciones de sexos de
esta especie es inversa al
atún aleta amarilla (más
hembras que machos)
(Nakamura 1985), supusimos que las proporciones
de sexos y costos relativos
del desove son exactamente contrarios para el
pez vela
Ya que la asimetría en las
proporciones de sexos de
esta especie es inversa al
atún aleta amarilla (más
hembras que machos)
(Nakamura 1985), supusimos que las proporciones
de sexos y costos relativos
del desove son exactamente contrarios para el
pez espada

Proporción de aumenK de la función de
Proporción base de con
to de consumo de alicrecmiento de von
sumo de alimento
mento usada para
Bertalanffy (yr-1) usada para reproducción1
crecimiento

Computado usando cohorte De Boggs (1989 de
artificial con Z basada en
Koto,1962)
cocientes P/B (Tabla 2b),
promedio de predicciones de
relaciones peso/talla
(Skillman y Yong 1974,
Wares y Sakagawa 1974), y
parámetros de crecimiento
(ver próxima columna)

Grupo con Tiempo mínimo y máximo
Wavg/Wk peso medio del
Parámetro de poten- Edad (años) detransición del grupo grande/peso
componentes
en grupo pequeño
a grupogrande (tk)
divididos (relativa a duración base) cia del reclutamiento
en transición)

TABLA 8b. (continuación)

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL
185

Estimado visualmente de
gráfica de talla a edad
(Bertignac y Yesaki 1994).
Supuesto que crecimiento
es comparable con
Scomberomorus commerson, excepto L mayor2
(IGFA 1999). Valores base
recomendados por
Christensen et al. (2000)3

Estimado visualmente de
gráfica de talla a edad
(Stevens 1975, Cailliet y
Bedford 1983, Pratt y
Casey 1983, De Crosta et
al. 1984, Branstetter
1987a, Branstetter 1987b,
Branstetter et al. 1987,
Branstetter y Stiles 1987,
Brown y Gruber 1988,
Killam y Parsons 1989,
Branstetter y Musick 1994,
Wintner y Cliff 1996)2.
Valores base recomendados
por Christensen et al.
(2000)3

Peto

Tiburones

8

Edad media de peces de
150 cm basada en ecuación
de von B. ajustada a predicciones de varias funciones
de crecimiento de von B.
para varios tiburones
(Stevens 1975, Cailliet y
Bedford 1983, Pratt y
Casey 1983, De Crosta et
al. 1984, Branstetter
1987a, Branstetter 1987b,
Branstetter et al. 1987,
Branstetter y Stiles 1987,
Brown y Gruber 1988,
Killam y Parsons 1989,
Branstetter y Musick 1994,
Natanson et al. 1995,
Wintner y Cliff 1996)

Edad media de peces de 90
cm, suponiendo que tasa
de crecimiento (K) de peto
es comparable con
Scomberomorus commerson (Bertignac y Yesaki
1994) y L mayor
8

Computado usando cohorte
artificial con Z basada en
cocientes P/B (Tabla 2b),
promedio de relaciones
peso/talla (Stevens 1975,
Stevens 1983, Branstetter
1987a, Branstetter 1987b,
Branstetter et al. 1987,
Branstetter y Stiles 1987,
Branstetter y Musick 1994,
Wetherbee et al. 1996), y
parámetros de crecimiento
(ver próxima columna)

Computado usando cohorte
artificial con Z basada en
cocientes P/B (Tabla 2b),
relación peso/talla (Iversen
y Yoshida 1957), y parámetros de crecimiento (ver
próxima columna)

K de ecuación de von
B. ajustado a predicciones de varias funciones de crecimiento
de von B. para varios
tiburones (de Aasen
1966, Stevens 1975,
Hoenig 1979, Cailliet y
Bedford 1983, Pratt y
Casey 1983, De Crosta
et al. 1984, Branstetter
1987a, Branstetter
1987b, Branstetter et
al. 1987, Branstetter y
Stiles 1987, Brown y
Gruber 1988, Killam y
Parsons 1989, Parsons
1993, Natanson et al.
1995, Wetherbee et al.
1996, Wintner y Cliff
1996)

Ya que la asimetría en las Valor base recomendado
proporciones de sexos de por Christensen et al.
estas especies es inversa (2000)
al atún aleta amarilla
(más hembras que
machos) (Compagno
1984), supusimos que las
proporciones de sexos y
costos relativos del desove
son exactamente contrarios para tiburones

Valor base recomendado
por Christensen et al.
(2000)

Proporción base de con Proporción de aumento de consumo de alisumo de alimento
mento usada para
usada para reproducción1
crecimiento

K supuesto comparable Supuesto ser igual que
con Scomberomorus para atún aleta amarilla
commerson (Bertignac
y Yesaki 1994)

K de la función de
crecmiento de von
Bertalanffy (yr-1)

1 Definido como el costo energético de reproducción dividido por la suma de los costos energéticos de reproducción y crecimiento.
2 Estimaciones iniciales de los parámetros (ETP1). Estos valores se presentan en Anexo Tabla 3.
3 Estimaciones modificadas de los parámetros (ETP7).

Relación lineal supuesta entre fecundidad
por camada y biomasa,
evidenciada en el caso
del atún aleta amarilla

Relación lineal supuesta entre fecundidad
por camada y biomasa,
evidenciada en el caso
del atún aleta amarilla

Grupo con Tiempo mínimo y máximo
Wavg/Wk peso medio del
Parámetro de poten- Edad (años) detransición del grupo grande/peso
en grupo pequeño
componentes
a grupogrande (tk)
divididos (relativa a duración base) cia del reclutamiento
en transición)

TABLA 8b. (continuación)

186
OLSON AND WATTERS

PELAGIC ECOSYSTEM MODEL

187

TABLE 9. Results of the sensitivity analysis for the model Ecosim simulations, including the effect of 20%, 30%, and 50%
changes of the P/B, Q/B, and EE parameters for Cephalopods and Auxis spp. on the sum of squares (SS) of the model's fit
to catch per day's fishing data for yellowfin tuna.
TABLA 9. Resultados del análisis de sensibilidad para la simulaciones de Ecosim del modelo, inclusive el efecto de cambios de 20%, 30%, y 50% de los parámetros P/B, Q/B, y EE para Cefalópodos y Auxis spp. sobre la suma de cuadrados (SS)
del ajuste del modelo a datos de captura por día de pesca para el atún aleta amarilla.
Parameter
Parámetro

Multiplier
Multiplicador

Initial value
Modified value
Valor inicial
Valor modificado
Cephalopods−−Cefalópodos
2.0
2.4
2.0
1.6
2.0
2.6
2.0
1.4

P/B
P/B
P/B
P/B

+0.2
-0.2
+0.3
-0.3

P/B
P/B
Q/B
Q/B
Q/B
Q/B
Q/B

+0.5
-0.5
+0.2
-0.2
+0.3
-0.3
+0.5

2.0
2.0
7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0
7.0

Q/B
EE
EE
EE
EE

-0.5
+0.2
-0.2
-0.3
-0.5

7.0
0.85
0.85
0.85
0.85

P/B
P/B
P/B
P/B
P/B
P/B
Q/B
Q/B
Q/B
Q/B
Q/B
Q/B
EE
EE
EE
EE

+0.2
-0.2
+0.3
-0.3
+0.5
-0.5
+0.2
-0.2
+0.3
-0.3
+0.5
-0.5
+0.2
-0.2
-0.3
-0.5

2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
2.5
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
25.0
0.95
0.95
0.95
0.95

SS
SS

% change in SS
Cambio en SS (%)

2.2357
2.4269
2.2392
3.8030

-0.22
8.321
-0.06
69.741

3.0
1.0
8.4
5.6
9.1
4.9
10.5

2.2503
--2
2.2136
2.2614
2.1667
2.2713
3.2558

0.44

3.5
1.02
0.68
0.595
0.425
Auxis spp.
3.0
2.0
3.25
1.75
3.8
1.3
30
20
32.5
17.5
37.5
12.5
1.14
0.76
0.67
0.48

2.2900
2.2563
2.1809
2.5578
--2

2.21
0.703
-2.661
14.161

2.3053
2.3467
2.3586
2.7691
2.4959
--2
2.3224
2.3234
2.4556
2.4272
3.3352
2.7900
2.2453
2.3444
2.6630
--2

2.89
4.744
5.27
23.591,4
11.40

-1.201
0.93
-3.301
1.38
45.311

3.654
3.70
9.601,4
8.33
48.861,4
24.53
0.213
4.644
18.851,4

1 The EE for Miscellaneous mesopelagic fishes is slightly greater than 1.0 for this parameterization−El EE para
Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos es ligeramente mayor que 1.0 para esta parametrización.
2 The model could not balance with this modified parameter value−El modelo no pudo ser balanceado con este valor
modificado del parámetro.
3 Inputted EE of 1.0 because EE>1.0 cannot be inputted−Se usó EE = 1.0 porque no se puede entrar EE>1.0.
4 The EE for Small yellowfin tuna is slightly greater than 1.0 for this parameterization−El EE para Atún aleta
amarilla pequeño es ligeramente mayor que 1.0 para esta parametrización.

188

OLSON AND WATTERS

UN MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO EN EL
OCÉANO PACÍFICO ORIENTAL TROPICAL
por
Robert J. Olson y George M. Watters1
RESUMEN
Llamamientos recientes hacia un enfoque más holístico al ordenamiento de la pesca han
motivado el desarrollo de modelos tróficos de balance de masas de los ecosistemas que sostienen
la producción pesquera. Desarrollamos una hipótesis modelo del ecosistema pelágico en el Océano
Pacífico oriental tropical (POT) con miras a mejorar los conocimientos de las relaciones entre las
distintas especies en el sistema y explorar las implicaciones ecológicas de métodos alternativos de
capturar atunes. Con Ecopath representamos las biomasas de los elementos principales en el ecosistema, y los flujos entre los mismos, y con Ecosim examinamos el comportamiento dinámico del
ecosistema con el tiempo. Parametrizamos el modelo para 38 especies o grupos de especies
(denominados “componentes” del modelo), y describimos las fuentes, justificaciones, supuestos, y
revisiones de nuestras estimaciones de los distintos parámetros, relaciones basadas en dieta, capturas retenidas de las pesquerías, y descartes de las mismas en el modelo. Realizamos análisis de
sensibilidad con una versión intermedia del modelo, para el balance de masas de Ecopath y las
trayectorias dinámicas predichas por Ecosim también. El análisis demostró que cambios en los
parámetros básicos para dos componentes en niveles tróficos medianos, Cefalópodos y Auxis spp.,
ejercieron la mayor influencia sobre el sistema. Cuando se alteraron el Q/B de los Cefalópodos y
el P/B de los Auxis spp. de sus valores iniciales y se balanceó el modelo de nuevo, las tendencias
de las trayectorias de la biomasa predichas por Ecosim no fueron sensibles, pero la escala fue sensible para varios componentes. Describimos el proceso de revisión al que fue sujeto el modelo,
inclusive revisiones por el Grupo de Trabajo sobre Captura Incidental de la CIAT y un grupo de
trabajo apoyado por el Centro Nacional para Síntesis y Análisis Ecológicos. Ajustamos el modelo
a series de tiempo históricas de capturas por unidad de esfuerzo y tasas de mortalidad de atunes
aleta amarilla y patudo en simulaciones que incorporaron esfuerzo de pesca histórico e impulsos
climáticos para representar el efecto de variaciones a escala de El Niño-Oscilación del Sur sobre
el sistema. El modelo fue diseñado para evaluar las posibles implicaciones ecológicas de la pesca
atunera de varias formas. Reconocemos la imposibilidad de que el modelo represente toda la complejidad de un ecosistema oceánico pelágico, pero creemos que el modelo del POT mejora los
conocimientos de la estructura y función del POT pelágico.
Palabras clave: ATUNES, ECOPATH CON ECOSIM, MODELADO DE ECOSISTEMAS,
PACÍFICO ORIENTAL TROPICAL, RED ALIMENTICIA
INTRODUCCIÓN
Un enfoque basado en ecosistemas al ordenamiento de pesquerías es importante para poder
mantener pesquerías sostenibles y ecosistemas sanos (FAO 1995, NRC 1999). Aunque los objetivos
del ordenamiento basado en ecosistemas son difíciles de definir, existe un reconocimiento general que
los modelos constituyen una herramienta importante para explorar las consecuencias ecológicas de la
pesca y mejorar los conocimientos del funcionamiento de los ecosistemas. Aunque los modelos de ecosistemas no sirven todavía para el ordenamiento de pesquerías, cumplimentan los modelos
____________________
1 Dirección actual: NOAA, Pacific Fisheries Environmental Laboratory, Pacific Grove, California, EE.UU.

189

190

OLSON Y WATTERS

monoespecíficos de pesquerías en el sentido que tienen el potencial de pronosticar los efectos imprevistos
de interacciones tróficas. El reconocimiento de esto ha conducido al desarrollo de modelos tróficos multiespecíficos que incorporan de forma explícita los efectos sobre el sistema de la explotación por la pesca.
Los ecosistemas del océano abierto son grandes y complejos, y muestrearlos es difícil. El
Océano Pacífico oriental tropical (POT) contiene algunas de las aguas más productivas de los
océanos del mundo (Barber y Chavez 1986). Los niveles superiores de la red alimenticia pelágica
comprenden atunes grandes, delfines, tiburones, peces picudos, y otras especies. Muchos de estos
depredadores son capturados, intencional o incidentalmente, en pesquerías internacionales
importantes. Los datos de estas pesquerías constituyen la fuente principal de información sobre
el ecosistema pelágico. Sin embargo, no se dispone de datos de pesca para muchas de las especies
no objetivo (una excepción es los datos recientes de especies grandes, ver Hall 1998). Los muestreos de poblaciones en el mar brindan una alternativa para ciertas especies, pero cuestan mucho
dinero y tiempo, y son imprácticos en el océano pelágico abierto.
La mejor estrategia, en la actualidad, para mejorar nuestros conocimientos del ecosistema
es desarrollar modelos que, con base en la mejor información disponible, 1) representan el ciclo
vital de los elementos principales del ecosistema, 2) describen, con base en estudios de dieta y
tasas de consumo, cómo la biomasa fluye entre los mismos, y 3) representan el tamaño y la composición por especies de las capturas de las distintas pesquerías. Los modelos deberían ser capaces
de contestar preguntas del tipo “¿qué pasaría si …?” sobre los posibles resultados de regímenes
alternativos de pesca. Si el modelo indica que ciertas especies o grupos de especies son más sensibles que otras a los efectos ecológicos de la pesca (es decir, cambios sustanciales en la biomasa
de especies no objetivo causados por un cambio en la tasa de pesca), entonces los estudios futuros, inclusive evaluaciones y monitoreo, podrían ser enfocados en esas especies o grupos.
En su 58a reunión, en junio de 1997, la Comisión Interamericana del Atún Tropical (CIAT)
estableció el Grupo de Trabajo sobre Captura Incidental para examinar la cuestión de las capturas
incidentales y descartes de todas las especies capturadas en la pesquería atunera con red de cerco
en el Océano Pacífico oriental. Uno de los términos de referencia del Grupo de Trabajo fue
“definir las relaciones entre las especies objetivo de la pesca y aquellas capturadas incidentalmente, con referencia especial a la sustentabilidad de las capturas de todas estas especies.” Esta
proporcionó el ímpetu inicial para desarrollar un modelo de ecosistema para el POT. Nuestro
objetivo fue desarrollar una descripción hipotéticas del ecosistema en las aguas pelágicas del POT.
ECOPATH CON ECOSIM
El modelo de ecosistema del POT pelágico fue desarrollado usando Ecopath con Ecosim
(EwE) (Walters et al. 1997, Christensen et al. 2000, Walters et al. 2000). EwE ha sido usado para
desarrollar muchos modelos de ecosistemas en el Océano Pacífico y otros lugares (por ejemplo,
Christensen y Pauly 1993). Ecopath brinda un marco para la construcción de modelos de balance
de masas de ecosistemas. Se genera el balance de masas a partir de estimaciones de la abundancia de los recursos (biomasas), las tasas de productividad o mortalidad de los mismos, cómo interactúan (composiciones de dieta y tasas de consumo de alimento), y la eficacia con la cual se utilizan los recursos en el ecosistema. Una vez descrito el ecosistema en Ecopath, se examina su
comportamiento dinámico a través del tiempo usando Ecosim.
En Ecopath, la energía que entra en cada componente del modelo necesita estar en equilibrio con la energía que sale del mismo, o sea
consumo = producción + respiración + alimento no asimilado.

(1)

La producción (P) de cada componente i es la suma de las capturas (Y), la mortalidad por
depredación (M2), la acumulación de biomasa (BA), la migración neta (E), y otra mortalidad (M0),

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

191
(2)

.

Bi is the biomasa del componente i, M0i = Pi(1 - EEi), donde EEi es la eficacia ecotrófica. Se
define EE como la proporción de la producción anual consumida o capturada dentro del sistema.
Se puede expresar la ecuación (2) como:
,

(3)

donde P/Bi es el cociente producción/biomasa, Q/Bi es el cociente consumo/biomasa, y DCij es la
fracción de la presa i en la dieta media del depredador j.
En Ecosim, la dinámica de la biomasa de todos los componentes del ecosistema que ocupan
niveles tróficos superiores a 1.0 es determinada por
.

(4)

El cambio en la biomasa del componente i (Bi) por unidad de tiempo (t) equivale a la acumulación
de biomasa menos tres tipos de pérdida. La acumulación de biomasa es la suma de la depredación
por el componente i sobre su presa (con el índice j) multiplicada por la eficacia bruta gi del componente i. La función cji(Bi,Bj) predice el consumo del componente j por el componente i a partir
de sus biomasas respectivas (ver Walters et al. 1997 para los detalles de esta función). Las pérdidas provienen de mortalidad natural no debida a la depredación (Mi), mortalidad por pesca (Fi), y
el consumo del componente i por sus depredadores.
En Ecosim, la biomasa del componente i que es vulnerable a la depredación por el componente j (Vij) es función de una tasa de vulnerabilidad (v).
,

(5)

donde aij es la tasa efectiva de búsqueda de la presa i por el depredador j. La biomasa vulnerable aumenta como resultado de intercambio con una biomasa invulnerable, v(Bi - Vij), y disminuye cuando las presas regresan a la condición invulnerable (vVij) o por depredación (aijVijBj).
Cuando v es pequeña, los flujos entre depredadores y presas son controlados principalmente por
variaciones en la biomasa de las presas; es decir, el control es por procesos forzados desde arriba.
Cuando v es grande, estos flujos son controlados principalmente por variaciones en la biomasa de
los depredadores; es decir, el control es por procesos forzados desde abajo. Estimamos una tasa
de vulnerabilidad para todos los vínculos depredador-presa en el modelo.
EwE exige los siguientes parámetros para cada componente del ecosistema: B, P/B, Q/B, EE,
eficacia de asimilación, composición de dieta, capturas retenidas (denominadas descargas en
EwE), capturas descartadas (denominadas descartes en EwE), y parámetros de transición ontogenética para componentes divididos (split pools; Marlines pequeños y Marlines grandes, por
ejemplo). Los parámetros de transición ontogénica rigen la transición de componentes grandes a
componentes pequeños; son parámetros tales como la tasa de crecimiento y la edad a la que ocurre
la transición. De los cuatro primeros parámetros especificados en este párrafo, B o EE puede ser
tratado como desconocido (para cada componente) y estimado mediante la solución de un conjunto de ecuaciones lineales simultáneas en Ecopath (ecuación 3).

192

OLSON Y WATTERS
EL MODELO DEL POT

Alcance
Nuestro modelo del ecosistema pelágico en el POT abarca la zona delineada por 20°N, 20°S,
150°O, y el límite aproximado de la plataforma continental de las Américas, unos 32.8 millones de
km2. Supusimos que la inmigración a esta región es compensada por la emigración de la misma.
En todo caso posible usamos los promedios de las estimaciones de los parámetros anuales de 19931997. Usamos unidades de toneladas·millón de km−2 y tasas anuales.
Nuestra versión final del modelo (ETP7) contiene 38 componentes (Tabla 1b).
Seleccionamos los componentes del modelo para incluir las principales especies explotadas (atunes
y marlines, por ejemplo), grupos funcionales (tiburones y cefalópodos, por ejemplo), especies sensibles (tortugas marinas y delfines, por ejemplo), y una especie que vive en el sistema durante
solamente una parte del año (el atún aleta azul del Pacífico). Algunos grupos taxonómicos fueron
segregados en componentes ontogénicos, por dos motivos. En primer lugar, las especies cuyos
adultos son muy grandes demuestran una ontogenía trófica considerable, y sus presas abarcan
varios componentes del modelo durante su ciclo vital. En segundo lugar, muchos de estos grupos
taxonómicos son capturados por distintas artes de pesca a distintos tamaños. Separamos algunos
grupos taxonómicos en dos componentes ontogénicos con base en los rangos de tamaño en la Tabla
1b. Otros grupos taxonómicos también demuestran ontogenía trófica durante su desarrollo, pero
los representamos con un solo componente debido a falta de datos.
Al definir los componentes del modelo, tomamos varios factores en cuenta. La agrupación
de grupos taxonómicos en componentes del modelo fue a menudo determinada por la escala taxonómica de la información disponible. La información incluyó diferencias básicas en la biología y
hábitat de los animales. Por ejemplo, especies y grupos funcionales fueron separados con base en
si su hábitat es epipelágico o mesopelágico; algunos de los depredadores (el atún aleta amarilla,
por ejemplo) se especializa en presas epipelágicas y otros (el atún patudo, por ejemplo) en presas
mesopelágicas. Se dispuso de poca información para ciertos grupos taxonómicos, y decidimos combinar grupos taxonómicos similares en grupos funcionales (Cefalópodos y Peces epipelágicos misceláneos, por ejemplo).
Parámetros
Basamos nuestras estimaciones de los parámetros para cada componente del modelo (Tablas
2b y 3b) en varias fuentes (Tabla 4b). Utilizamos valores publicados en todo caso posible. Usamos
también datos e informes inéditos para las estimaciones de composición de dieta, B, Q/B, capturas
retenidas, y descartes. Ajustamos árboles de regresión (Breiman et al. 1984) a los datos de un
estudio de hábitos alimenticios para explicar la variabilidad temporal y espacial en la composición
de la dieta de ciertos depredadores. Usamos evaluaciones de poblaciones para las estimaciones de
B y P/B (suponiendo P/B = Z), y analizamos datos de la pesca para obtener otras estimaciones de
P/B, parámetros ontogénicos, capturas retenidas, y descartes. Para ciertos componentes, asignamos EE con base en nuestros supuestos sobre la magnitud relativa de F y M. Si supusimos que
F fue bajo en relación con M, asignamos un EE bajo. Si supusimos que F fue aproximadamente
igual a M, supusimos que EE = 0.5. Si supusimos que F fue alto en relación con M, asignamos un
EE alto. Por lo tanto, supusimos que EE (definido como la fracción de la producción usada dentro del sistema) depende principalmente de la mortalidad por pesca. Multiplicamos las estimaciones de abundancia basadas en estudios de transectos lineales por estimaciones de peso medio
para obtener ciertas estimaciones de B (Ballenas dentadas y Delfin manchado y mesopelágico, por
ejemplo). Suponiendo que la capturabilidad cerquera es estrictamente determinada por tamaño,

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

193

usamos coeficientes de capturabilidad por tamaño para el atún aleta amarilla para escalar las capturas por unidad de esfuerzo (CPUE) y así estimar B para varias especies capturadas incidentalmente por tipo de lance. Usamos el metanálisis de Pauly (1980) para obtener estimaciones de P/B
para varios componentes. Hicimos también varios otros supuestos para derivar estimaciones de
parámetros para los que faltaba información. Estos supuestos típicamente tomaron la forma de
aplicar la información de un componente a otro componente para el cual faltaba esa información
(por ejemplo, ajustar las estimaciones de Q/B basadas en estudios de bioenergética del atún aleta
amarilla para aplicarlas al atún patudo). En la Tabla 4b se resumen nuestras fuentes, justificaciones, y supuestos para las estimaciones iniciales y revisadas de B, P/B, Q/B, EE, y composición
de dieta. Señalamos que hay mucha incertidumbre asociada con los parámetros de muchos de los
componentes. Intentamos identificar los parámetros y componentes para los cuales la información era menos confiable (Anexo Tablas 1b y 2b, notas), y evaluamos la sensibilidad del modelo a la
incertidumbre de los parámetros.
Calculamos la cantidad de alimento no asimilado para cada componente de depredadores
(U/Q, Tabla 2b) con base en la composición de proteína, grasa, y carbohidratos en sus presas.
Obtuvimos estas composiciones para los grupos taxonómicos de presas de Sidwell (1981) y Bykov
et al. (2000). Phillips (1969) presentó la digeribilidad media de proteína, grasa, y carbohidratos
en la dieta (0.9, 0.85, y 0.4, respectivamente). En el caso de la proteína, restamos una porción por
la excreción nitrogénea (Brett y Groves 1979), resultando en un ajuste total de 0.7. Calculamos
las porciones disponibles de proteína, grasa, y carbohidratos en las presas como la digeribilidad de
cada uno multiplicada por la proporción (por peso húmedo) de cada uno en cada componente de
presa. Calculamos U/Q para la mayoría de los componentes de presas como la suma de las porciones no disponibles (1 − disponible) de proteína, grasa, y carbohidratos, ajustado a 100%.
Asignamos la porción no disponible de presa zooplanctónica con base en información de Shannon
y Jarre-Teichmann (1999), y la de fitoplancton y detritos disponibles con base en información de
Valiela (1984). U/Q para cada componentede depredadores fue la suma de las porciones no
disponibles de sus presas ponderada por las proporciones de cada componente de presas en la dieta.
Estimamos las capturas retenidas y descartes de las pesquerías, promediadas sobre 19931997, para cada componente del modelo por arte de pesca (red de cerco, palangre, y caña y anzuelo) y modalidad de pesca cerquera (sobre atunes asociados con delfines, con objetos flotantes, y no
asociados) (Tablas 5b y 6b) (ver Hall (1998) para una discusión de los métodos de pesca en la pesquería atunera del Océano Pacífico oriental). Obtuvimos los datos de captura de las bases de datos
de la CIAT. No se incluyó en el modelo, pequeñas pesquerías locales costeras, artesanales y
deportivas debido a falta de datos.
Son necesarios parámetros de transición ontogénica para aquéllos grupos taxonómicos que
están separados en dos componentes ontogénicos, (denominados componentes divididos (split
pools)) (Tabla 7b). Estos incluyen información sobre el ciclo vital de funciones de crecimiento,
relaciones peso-talla, parámetros reproductivos, y parámetros de reclutamiento. En la Tabla 8b
se resumen las fuentes, justificaciones, y supuestos de nuestras estimaciones iniciales y modificadas de estos parámetros. Nótese que se usan valores base para los parámetros que describen el
tiempo relativo mínimo y máximo que los animales podrían pasar en los componentes pequeños.
Usamos estos valores porque, según Christensen et al. (2000), las simulaciones de Ecosim son muy
sensibles a este parámetro y se recomiendan los valores base. Similarmente, 0.8 es recomendado
por Christensen et al. (2000) para la proporción de aumento en el consumo de alimento usado para
el crecimiento. Estimamos todos los demás parámetros de transición ontogénica para cada componente dividido (Tablas 7b y 8b). Usamos modelos de crecimiento para calcular las estimaciones
iniciales del tiempo relativo máximo y mínimo que los animales pasas en las etapas pequeñas (referencias en Tabla 8b, estimaciones en Anexo Tabla 3).

194

OLSON Y WATTERS

En Ecosim, usamos los valores base para los siguientes parámetros de “Group information
[Información de grupo]”. Estos incluyen “Maximum relative P/B [P/B relativo máximo]” (2.0),
“Maximum relative feeding time [Tiempo de alimentación relativo máximo]” (2.0), “Feeding time
adjust rate [Tasa de ajuste de tiempo de alimentación]” (0.5), “Predator effect on feeding time
[Efecto de depredador sobre el tiempo de alimentación]” (0.0), “Density-dependent catchability
[Capturabilidad dependiente de la densidad]” (1.0), y “Qbmax/Qbo (for handling time [para el tiempo de consumo])” (1000). Para la “Fraction of ‘other’ mortality sensitive to changes in feeding
time [Fracción de ‘otra’ mortalidad sensible a cambios en el tiempo de alimentación],” usamos 0.0
para componentes compuestos por individuos grandes y depredadores ápice, 0.5 para peces medianos consumidos por los depredadores de nivel alto, y 1.0 para los componentes de presas pequeñas.
Balance del modelo
Nuestro conjunto inicial de estimaciones de los parámetros (ETP1; Anexo Tablas 1b y 2b)
no produjo un modelo balanceado en Ecopath. En el modelo no balanceado, la depredación estimada sobre ciertos componentes fue mayor que la producción estimada de los mismos. Esto
resultó de una sobreestimación de las tasas de consumo y/o biomasa de los depredadores, subestimaciones de las tasas de producción y/o biomasa de las presas, o datos de dieta no fiables. Hicimos
ajustes de varios parámetros y componentes, de acuerdo a nuestra confianza relativa en las estimaciones iniciales de los parámetros. Esta clasificación fue subjetiva, y se basó en evaluaciones
de la calidad de los datos, el número y verosimilitud de los supuestos, etcétera. Las estimaciones
de parámetros de confianza baja (Anexo Tablas 1b y 2b) fueron ajustadas con mayor frecuencia y
en mayor grado que las de confianza mediana. En todo caso posible, no ajustamos los parámetros
en los que teníamos confianza relativamente alta. Tuvimos también dificultades para balancear
la primera versión del modelo porque las estimaciones de canibalismo dentro de algunos componentes fueron excesivas en relación con las tasas de producción de los mismos. En ETP1 (Anexo),
el canibalismo fue problemático en los dos componentes de cefalópodos y en el componente de
Zooplancton. Resolvimos este problema juntando los Cefalópodos epipelágicos y mesopelágicos en
un componente de Cefalópodos, y separando el componente de Zooplancton en dos componentes
de zooplancton con base en su tamaño y hábitos de alimentación.
Tras balancear ETP1, hicimos cambios adicionales en ETP2. Eliminamos Petos grandes y
pequeños de los Piscívoros misceláneos grandes y pequeños porque el peto es consumido por
depredadores diferentes de los que comen los carángidos y otros peces pelágicos pequeños. Luego
combinamos los Piscívoros misceláneos grandes y pequeños en un solo componente. Omitimos las
Anchoas como componente y las combinamos con los Peces epipelágicos misceláneos porque son
consumidas en solamente una pequeña parte del POT, y balancear sus requerimientos de consumo
implicó incorrectamente tasas de producción de zooplancton excesivamente altas en todo el sistema. En algunos casos, eliminamos una estimación de biomasa poco confiable y la reemplazamos
con una estimación de EE. Estas modificaciones y otras posteriores culminaron en la versión más
reciente del modelo, ETP7, descrita en las Tablas 2b y 3b.
En la Tabla 4b se resumen los ajustes principales en los parámetros del modelo necesarios
para balancearlo (ver nota 3 en la tabla). Se pueden ver nuestros ajustes a la matriz de dieta si
se comparan la Tabla 3b y Anexo Tabla 2b.
ANÁLISIS DE SENSIBILIDAD
El modelo es una de varias hipótesis posibles para describir el ecosistema pelágico en el
POT. Gran parte de la información sintetizada en este modelo es incierta (ver notas en las Anexo
Tablas 1b y 2b). Consideramos la sensibilidad de una versión intermedia del modelo (ETP5),

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

195

tanto para el balance de masas de Ecopath como para las trayectorias dinámicas predichas por
Ecosim. En primer lugar, variamos los parámetros básicos B, P/B, Q/B, y EE por 50% y +50%
(en pasos de 10%) para cada componente y calculamos el cambio porcentual resultante en cada
uno de los parámetros computados por Ecopath (Tabla 2b, nota 1) para todos los demás componentes. Resumimos los resultados de este análisis con un índice de sensibilidad (Figura 1). El
índice representa el número de parámetros afectados ±30% o más para cada componente.
El balance de masas de Ecopath fue relativamente poco sensible a los valores de los
parámetros para la mayoría de los componentes (Figura 1). Variar los parámetros para cuatro
componentes que ocupan los niveles tróficos más altos (Marlines grandes y pequeños, Tiburones
pequeños, y Ballenas dentadas), un componente intermedio (Atún barrilete), y tres componentes
cerca del fondo de la red alimenticia (Consumidores primarios, Consumidores secundarios, y
Peces epipelágicos misceláneos) indicó una sensibilidad del modelo entre baja y mediana. Para las
Ballenas barbadas la sensibilidad del modelo fue cero.
El análisis inicial de sensibilidad demostró que cambios en los parámetros de dos componentes, Cefalópodos y Auxis spp., ejercen la mayor influencia sobre el sistema (Figura 1). Estos
componentes ocupan niveles tróficos medianos, y muchos de los depredadores de nivel alto se alimentan de ellos. Se sabe poco acerca de los Auxis spp. y de las muchas especies de cefalópodos en
el POT, y estudios de estos dos componentes serían tal vez la forma más eficaz de ampliar nuestros conocimientos del ecosistema del POT.
Ya que la sensibilidad del balance de masas de Ecopath fue máxima a los parámetros de
Cefalópodos y Auxis spp., concentramos la segunda parte del análisis de sensibilidad en estos dos
componentes. Evaluamos la sensibilidad de las trayectorias de biomasa predichas por Ecosim a
cambios en los parámetros básicos para estos componentes en ETP5. Cambiamos P/B, Q/B, y EE
para los Cefalópodos y Auxis spp. un 20%, 30%, y 50%, y evaluamos el ajuste de las biomasas
predichas a datos de CPUE para el Atún aleta amarilla (CIAT 1999a, Figura 31). Reducciones en
la suma de cuadrados (SS) de los ajustes, indicando una mejora con respecto a los valores iniciales,
ocurrieron en tan sólo unos pocos casos (Tabla 9). Las mejoras en las SS fueron leves, y en la mayoría de los casos los ajustes fueron peores. Para los Cefalópodos, 5 de los 14 ajustes produjeron
cambios negativos en SS con respecto al ajuste con los valores iniciales, pero la mejora máxima en
SS fue de solamente 3.3%. Cambios positivos en los valores de SS, indicando un ajuste peor, alcanzaron hasta un 69.7%. Para las Auxis spp., ninguna de las variaciones de los parámetros produjo
un ajuste mejor a los datos de CPUE de aleta amarilla (Tabla 9).
Con fines ilustrativos, analizamos la relación entre las sensibilidades en el balance de masas
de Ecopath y los cambios en las trayectorias de la biomasa predichas por las simulaciones
descritas en la sección titulada AJUSTE DEL MODELO A DATOS HISTÓRICOS. Ya que
tanto el balance de masas de Ecopath como los ajustes de Ecosim a los datos de CPUE fueron altamente sensibles a cambios en el Q/B de los Cefalópodos y el P/B de las Auxis spp. (Figura 1, Tabla
9), hicimos este tipo de cambio, uno por uno, a los parámetros básicos en Ecopath y balanceamos
de nuevo cada vez. Luego, en Ecosim, repetimos las simulaciones para el modelo básico ETP5,
para ETP5 con el Q/B de Cefalópodos cambiado, y para ETP5 con el P/B de Auxis spp. cambiado,
y comparamos los resultados. Cambiamos el Q/B de los Cefalópodos por un factor de 0.4 (Q/B
nuevo = 9.8) y el P/B de Auxis spp. por un factor de -0.4 (P/B nuevo = 1.5) en estas dos últimas
simulaciones. Graficamos las trayectorias predichas de la biomasa para 13 componentes del modelo con vínculos tróficos fuertes con Cefalópodos y Auxis spp. para un subconjunto de las tres simulaciones, o sea para 1960-1998. Descubrimos que las predicciones de biomasa absoluta variaron
notoriamente entre las tres simulaciones (Figura 2, dos recuadros inferiores, líneas de tendencia
mayores de 1.0), pero las tendencias predichas en biomasa no fueron sensibles a los valores de Q/B
y P/B modificados (Figura 2, dos recuadros inferiores, líneas de tendencia rectas o casi rectas).

196

OLSON Y WATTERS
REVISIÓN DEL MODELO

Nuestro modelo final (ETP7) es el producto de una extensa revisión por un gran número de
científicos (ver RECONOCIMIENTOS). Se formaron dos grupos de trabajo específicamente
para desarrollar y evaluar el modelo. El primero, formado bajo un proyecto titulado
“Implicaciones Ecológicas de Estrategias Alternativas de Pesca de Depredadores Apice," fue subvencionado por el Centro Nacional para Análisis y Síntesis Ecológicos (NCEAS) en Santa
Barbara, California (www.nceas.ucsb.edu). Además, el Grupo de Trabajo sobre Captura
Incidental de la CIAT acordó, en su primera reunión en julio de 1998, que Ecopath con Ecosim
constituye un buen punto de partida para modelar la dinámica del ecosistema en el POT, y
estableció un subgrupo, Estudios y Modelado Ecológicos (EME), para supervisar y revisar nuestro modelo.
El objetivo de la primera reunión del grupo de trabajo de NCEAS, celebrada en noviembre
de 1998, fue analizar y balancear la primera versión del modelo. En esa ocasión se efectuaron
mejoras considerable al ETP1 (Anexo), y el modelo resultante fue denominado ETP2. Se revisaron los componentes del modelo y se ajustaron los valores de los parámetros para lograr balance
de masas (ver Balance del modelo). El grupo de trabajo de NCEAS celebró cuatro reuniones
adicionales en las que ETP2 fue evaluado, modificado, y finalmente usado para análisis del ecosistema.
En una reunión del subgrupo EME en abril de 1999, los participantes discutieron la variedad de información necesaria para construir modelos de estado estacionario y dinámicos del ecosistema. El subgrupo discutió también otros enfoques al modelado, entre ellos el modelo de
Andersen y Ursin (1977), análisis multiespecífico de poblaciones virtuales (MSVPA) (por ejemplo, Pope 1979), análisis de rendimiento por recluta con especies mixtas (por ejemplo, Murawski
1984), modelos basados en individuos (IBM) (por ejemplo, Tyler y Rose 1994), y herramientas de
vida artificial (por ejemplo, Dagorn et al. 2000). La primera versión balanceada del modelo del
POT, ETP2, fue analizada en esta reunión, y se hicieron recomendaciones para mejorar el modelo y para análisis futuros. Seguimos varias de estas recomendaciones durante el año siguiente.
Las recomendaciones del subgrupo EME fueron resumidas en dos categorías: 1) prioridades a
corto plazo para modificar y calibrar ETP2, y 2) recomendaciones a largo plazo para el modelado
(IATTC 1999b). En el año siguiente seguimos todas las recomendaciones siguientes excepto la última.
z Añadir componentes para pez espada, atún aleta azul, atún albacora, y ballenas barbadas (en caso que fuese posible determinar que estas ballenas se alimentan sustan
cialmente en la zona tropical).
z Definir de nuevo la zona del modelo, considerando, por ejemplo, provincias oceánicas o
la zona principal de la pesquería de superficie.
z Realizar un análisis espectral por tamaño del organismo del ecosistema del POT como
método alternativo para estimar la biomasa.
z Comparar los procesos forzados desde arriba y desde abajo en el modelo, a fin de evaluar
la importancia relativa de influencias ambientales sobre el ecosistema del POT.
z Comparar estimaciones previas de la variabilidad del reclutamiento del atún aleta amarilla
en el OPO con aquéllas producidas por el modelo.
z Realizar un análisis de sensibilidad de los resultados de Ecosim.
z Incorporar datos recientes sobre capturas incidentales en la pesquería palangrera.
z Comparar el modelo del POT con uno de una cadena alimenticia más corta, tal como la del
sistema de afloramiento peruano.
En las secciones siguientes se resumen nuestras respuestas a las recomendaciones a corto
plazo. Como resultado de estas modificaciones, y de la incorporación de sugerencias del grupo de

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

197

trabajo de NCEAS (que continuó reuniéndose durante 1999-2000), ETP2 se convirtió finalmente
en ETP7, el modelo final presentado en este informe.
Componentes del modelo adicionales
Añadimos Pez espada grandes y pequeños, Atún aleta azul, Ballenas barbadas, y Albacora
al modelo, separamos los Productores en dos componentes, y reestructuramos los dos componentes de zooplancton. En la Tabla 4b se resumen nuestras fuentes de información y supuestos
para los cambios.
No se incluyó el pez espada (Xiphias gladius) en la primera versión del modelo porque se
consideraba que ocurría principalmente en aguas templadas, y que constituía un componente
menor del ecosistema del POT. Si embargo, con base en un estudio más extenso de la literatura,
incluimos componentes para dos tamaños de Pez espada en el modelo.
No incluimos el atún aleta azul del Pacífico (Thunnus orientalis) en la primera versión del
modelo porque su distribución en el Pacífico oriental está principalmente en aguas templadas, y
es un componente menor del ecosistema del POT. Sin embargo, con base en un examen más detallado de la literatura, incluimos un componente de Atún aleta azul en el modelo. Datos de marcado (Bayliff 1994) demuestran que muchos aletas azules realizan una migración transpacífica del
Océano Pacífico occidental al oriental de jóvenes. Usamos los datos de marcado para estimar que
ocurren interacciones ecológicas con el aleta azul en tan sólo el 7% del área del modelo, y supusimos que residen en esta región durante cuatro meses del año.
No incluimos las ballenas barbadas en la primera versión del modelo porque supusimos que
la mayoría de estas especies de ballena no se alimentan en las regiones tropicales del POT. Hay
ballenas azules (Balaenoptera musculus) residentes cerca del Domo de Costa Rica. También viven
en el Golfo de California durante ciertas temporadas, y se sabe que se alimentan allí. También hay
ballenas de Bryde (B. edeni) residentes en zonas costeras del POT. Las demás ballenas barbadas
que ocurren en el OPO tropical, por ejemplo los rorcuales común (B. physalus), del norte (B. borealis) y jorobado (Megaptera novaeangliae), no se alimentan en la zona tropical. Añadimos un componente denominado Ballenas barbadas, compuesta por ballenas azules y de Bryde. (Esta información sobre las ballenas fue suministrada por S. Reilly (Servicio Nacional de Pesquerías
Marinas, La Jolla, California, EE.UU.) y M. Scott (CIAT, La Jolla, California, EE.UU.).)
No incluimos el atún albacora (Thunnus alalunga) en la primera versión del modelo porque
consideramos solamente la albacora del norte, que no ocurre a menudo en el área del modelo. Sin
embargo, las flotas palangreras de Japón, Taiwan, y las naciones isleras del Pacífico capturan cantidades considerables de albacora del sur en el área del modelo (Uosaki y Bayliff 1999, Hampton
y Fournier 2000), por lo que añadimos un componente denominado Albacora para representar la
albacora del sur. Los datos de captura provienen de Lawson (2001).
Redefinición del área del modelo
Determinamos que redefinir el área del modelo para que correspondiera más exactamente
con la pesquería de superficie del Océano Pacífico oriental no sería un cambio útil. Reducir el área
del modelo eliminaría algunas de las capturas de la flota palangrera, y agrandarla incluiría animales de aguas templadas que no ocurren en la mayor parte del POT. Muchas de las especies tropicales que ocurren relativamente cerca de la costa al norte de 20°N ya están representadas en el
modelo; incluyen cangrejos rojos, pez espada, atunes (inclusive aleta azul), peces picudos,
tiburones, y mamíferos marinos. No obstante, no se fijó el límite norte del modelo en una latitud
más alta porque al norte de 20°N algunas especies templadas y algunas especies tropicales se solapan durante parte del año. El modelo representa óptimamente el sistema al sur de 20°N.

198

OLSON Y WATTERS

Dividir el modelo en varios modelos más pequeños, correspondientes a provincias oceánicas
(Longhurst 1998), crearía el problema de representar adecuadamente los animales móviles. Varios
de las especies y grupos funcionales se trasladan entre distintas provincias oceánicas, pero no
teníamos información sobre la duración de la estadía de estos animales en cada provincia, ni sobre
la cantidad de energía que consumen en cada una.
Análisis espectral por tamaño del organismo
El subgrupo EME sugirió que un análisis espectral por tamaño del organismo (Pratt y Casey
1983, Rodriguez y Mullin 1986, Boudreau y Dickie 1992) para el POT podría ser útil para calibrar
nuestras estimaciones de biomasas y para estimar las biomasas de ciertos componentes menos
conocidos. Realizamos este análisis, pero descubrimos que los resultados no eran concluyentes
para el modelo debido a incertidumbre en estimaciones independientes de la biomasa de fitoplancton y bacterias en el POT. Por lo tanto, no hicimos ningún cambio basado en la relación
tamaño del organismo-espectro.
Impulsos ambientales
Los miembros del grupo de trabajo de NCEAS exploraron cómo la variación climática a
escala de El Niño-Oscilación del Sur (ENOS) podría afectar los animales en los niveles tróficos
medianos y superiores en el POT. Usaron el modelo del POT para simular los efectos de pulsos
sencillos de anomalías climáticas, ciclos climáticos regulares, y el efecto de invernadero. En
primer lugar, establecieron una relación empírica entre las anomalías de la temperatura superficial del mar (TSM) en la región NIÑO32 del POT y las concentraciones de clorofila en la superficie para simular los efectos forzados desde abajo de impulsar físicamente la biomasa de
Fitoplancton grande. Desarrollaron también una hipótesis alternativa que los impulsos físicos,
además de afectar la biomasa de Fitoplancton grande, afectan simultáneamente la producción de
huevos por los depredadores y el grado al cual los depredadores en reclutamiento son ellos mismos vulnerables a la depredación. Watters et al. (en prensa) resumen los resultados y conclusiones de ese estudio.
Comparaciones con evaluaciones de la CIAT de la población de atún aleta amarilla
ETP7 predice tendencias en la biomasa del atún aleta amarilla que concuerdan aproximadamente con las evaluaciones de la CIAT de la población. Incorporamos datos históricos de
esfuerzo de pesca y CPUE para el aleta amarilla, anomalías de la TSM, y efectos hipotéticos de
temperatura sobre la producción de huevos y larvas para el aleta amarilla en una simulación para
ver si el modelo podía reproducir las tendencias en la biomasa estimadas en las evaluaciones de
la CIAT. La trayectoria simulada de la biomasa de Atún aleta amarilla grande y pequeño fue similar al patrón de las CPUE de barcos cerqueros de clase 6 (de más de 425 m3 de capacidad de
acarreo de pescado) ilustrado en IATTC (1999a: Figura 31). En la sección titulada AJUSTE DEL
MODELO A DATOS HISTÓRICOS se presenta mayor detalle al respecto y otros análisis.
Sensibilidad de Ecosim
En la reunión del subgrupo EME presentamos los resultados de un análisis de sensibilidad de la
porción Ecopath del modelo. Posteriormente, evaluamos la sensibilidad de las trayectorias de
____________________
2 La región NIÑO3 del Pacífico oriental ecuatorial es definida por Centro de Predicción Climática (CPC) del Servicio
Meteorológico Nacional de EE.UU. como la zona delineada por 5°N-5°S, 150°-90°O. CPC presenta las anomalías medias
mensuales de la TSM en su página de internet, http://www.cpc.noaa.gov.

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

199

Ecosim a cambios en los parámetros básicos para los componentes de Cefalópodos y Auxis spp. En
la sección anterior titulada ANÁLISIS DE SENSIBILIDAD se presentan los resultados.
Datos de capturas incidentales palangreras
Incorporamos datos más recientes, proporcionados por H. Nakano (Instituto Nacional de
Investigación de Pesquerías de Ultramar, Shimizu, Japón), sobre las capturas incidentales de
tiburones por la flota palangrera japonesa. Multiplicamos el número de tiburones capturado
anualmente por estimaciones del peso promedio de tiburones capturados con palangre de Bailey
et al. (1996) para obtener estimaciones de las descargas y descartes de tiburones. Determinamos
cuáles tiburones fueron clasificados de grandes y pequeños, y cuáles fueron descargados y descartados, de información en Nakano et al. (1997).
Modificación de los componentes de plancton
Uno de los comentarios sobre ETP5 nos animó a modificar sustancialmente los componentes de Fitoplancton y Zooplancton en el modelo. Chai et al. (2002) usaron un modelo de nutrientes-fitoplancton-zooplancton-detritos para producir estimaciones de biomasa y producción de
dos grupos de fitoplancton y dos de zooplancton en el Pacífico oriental ecuatorial. El modelo se
basa en ciclos de nitrógeno y silicatos impulsados por un modelo tridimensional de circulación
para 5°N-5°S, 90°O-180°. Descubrieron que sus resultados fueron similares a los de observaciones
en el campo (por ejemplo, Landry et al. 1995, Barber et al. 1996, Dugdale y Wilkerson 1998).
Aunque se nos animó a estructurar de nuevo los niveles tróficos inferiores de nuestro modelo con
base en la caracterización de Chai et al. (2002) del sistema ecuatorial de afloramiento, reconocemos que este modelo no representa completamente la producción primaria y secundaria en el POT
pelágico entero.
Designamos nuevos componentes del modelo para Productores pequeños, Fitoplancton
grande, Microzooplancton, y Mesozooplancton. En la Tabla 1b se detalla la composición taxonómica de estos componentes (M. Ohman, Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla,
California, EE.UU., comunicación personal). Adoptamos las estimaciones de Chai et al. (2002) de
P/B, y derivamos estimaciones de EE de su modelo. Derivamos los EE dividiendo del flujo entrando a cada componente por el flujo saliendo del mismo y ajustando por las proporciones de NH4,
nitrógeno detrital, y silicato detrital que son recicladas en el ecosistema. Nuestras estimaciones
de biomasa para los cuatro componentes de plancton (Tabla 2b) son más bajas que las de Chai et
al., pero este resultado parece ser justificado porque nuestro modelo usa promedios sobre áreas
menos productivas que el sistema ecuatorial de afloramiento descrito por Chai et al. (2002).
AJUSTE DEL MODELO A DATOS HISTÓRICOS
Ajustamos el modelo a datos de series de tiempo sobre los atunes aleta amarilla y patudo.
Establecimos las condiciones iniciales para el ajuste simulando un período de 51 años sin esfuerzo de pesca, y luego usamos una serie histórica (1961-1998) de esfuerzo de pesca para cada una do
las cinco artes y modalidades de pesca en el modelo para impulsar la mortalidad por pesca. Una
simulación de 51 años sin pesca permite a la biomasa de los componentes del modelo alcanzar el
equilibrio a niveles más altos, cercanos posiblemente a las condiciones no explotadas o de
explotación temprana. Estandarizamos las estimaciones de esfuerzo de pesca (días de pesca para
los tres tipos de lance cerquero y caña y anzuelo; número de anzuelos para palangres) de 19611998 al esfuerzo en 1993 (Figura 3). Usamos también los impulsos climáticos empíricos para
Fitoplancton grande, descritos en la sección de Impulsos ambientales, a fin de incluir los efectos de variación climática en la simulación.

200

OLSON Y WATTERS

Ajustamos el modelo de ecosistema a estimaciones de biomasa relativa y tasas de mortalidad total media para Atún aleta amarilla grande y pequeño (Figura 3) y Atún patudo grande y
pequeño (Figura 4). Estas estimaciones de biomasa y mortalidad provienen de las evaluaciones
de las poblaciones de Maunder y Watters (2001) y Watters y Maunder (2001). En el caso del Atún
aleta amarilla grande, usamos la estimación de la biomasa al principio de cada año para peces en
el séptimo trimestre o más después del reclutamiento a las pesquerías. En el caso del Atún patudo grande, usamos la estimación de la biomasa al principio de cada año para peces en el noveno
trimestre o más después del reclutamiento a las pesquerías. Para el Atún aleta amarilla y Atún
patudo pequeños, restamos las estimaciones de biomasa para los peces grandes de las estimaciones de biomasa total. Se escalaron todas las estimaciones de biomasa a las biomasas en 1993 y
fueron tratadas como CPUE. Para ajustarlas se ajustó repetidamente la tasa de vulnerabilidad (v,
ecuación (5)) para todos los vínculos depredador-presa en el modelo a fin de reducir al mínimo los
errores de las sumas de cuadrados (SS). Al estimar las tasas de vulnerabilidad, intentamos agrupar componentes similares del modelo en varias formas a fin de explorar la hipótesis que los animales que desempeñan papeles comparables en el ecosistema serían vulnerables a la depredación
de forma comparable. Por ejemplo, estimamos v por separado para depredadores ápice (definidos
como los componentes de nivel trófico > 4.8), depredadores (nivel trófico 3.8-4.8), y presas (nivel
trófico < 3.8). Ninguno de los escenarios alternativos de vulnerabilidad fue mejor (SS menor y
parametrización más parsimoniosa) que la estimación con una sola v común. La mejor estimación
de v fue 0.2889. En las Figuras 3 y 4 se ilustran los ajustes a las estimaciones de biomasa relativa de Atún aleta amarilla grande y pequeño y Atún patudo grande y pequeño, respectivamente.
Los ajustes para el aleta amarilla fueron considerablemente mejores que los del patudo: capturaron el régimen de reclutamiento aparentemente mayor de 1985-1998 (Maunder y Watters
2002) (Figura 3), mientras que los del patudo no reflejan el aumento en la biomasa relativa que
se estima ocurrió durante 1984-1987 (Watters y Maunder 2002) (Figura 4).
DISCUSIÓN
Aplicaciones del modelo
El modelo de ecosistema del POT fue desarrollado como descripción hipotética del ecosistema. El modelo es asimismo útil para evaluar las posibles implicaciones ecológicas de muchos
esquemas alternativos de pesca que se podrían proponer como medidas de ordenamiento en el POT.
Es posible modelar cambios en el esfuerzo de pesca para cualquier arte de pesca independientemente o para cualquier combinación de las cinco artes definidas (tres modalidades de pesca
cerquera (sobre delfines, objetos flotantes, y atunes no asociados), palangre, y caña y anzuelo). Se
podrían usar escenarios simulados que varían el esfuerzo de pesca al considerar reducciones en la
capacidad de la flota, límites globales sobre el número de lances de un tipo particular, o límites
sobre el número de dispositivos agregadores de peces (plantados) que se permite usar.
Cambios en el esfuerzo de pesca sobre ciertas especies o grupos, individual o conjuntamente,
pueden también ser simulados. Por ejemplo, escenarios simulados que varían las capturas de
componentes particulares del ecosistema podrían ser usados para evaluar la reacción de la red alimenticia a vedas estacionales o límites de captura de especies objetivo. Podrían ocurrir cambios
en la mortalidad por pesca de conjuntos particulares de especies debido a medidas para reducir las
capturas incidentales. Rejas clasificadoras (Misund y Beltestad 1994) en redes de cerco podrían
reducir la mortalidad por pesca de atunes pequeños y otras especies que se concentran cerca de
objetos flotantes, permitiéndoles escapar pero reteniendo a los individuos de mayor tamaño. Si
ciertas características de los plantados están correlacionadas con la atracción de ciertas especies
que necesitan protección, la reglamentación de dichas características podría llevar a una reducción

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

201

de las capturas incidentales de esas especies.
El modelo de ecosistema puede ser usado para simular cambios en el esfuerzo de pesca
durante ciertos períodos del año. Estos escenarios podrían incluir vedas de ciertos tipos de lance,
tal como una moratoria sobre lances sobre objetos flotantes después de alcanzar una cierta cuota.
Advertencias
Sabemos muy poco acerca da la productividad y las poblaciones permanentes de varios componentes del modelo, especialmente aquéllos en los niveles tróficos medianos y bajos. Hay una
gran incertidumbre asociada con los parámetros de muchos de los componentes , y dados los resultados de nuestros análisis de sensibilidad, estimaciones de la biomasa y otros parámetros en
Ecopath para los Cefalópodos y Auxis spp. serían especialmente deseables. Aunque estimamos v
(ecuación 5) para cada componente, no podemos determinar si estamos representando la reacción
funcional (functional response) correcta para cada componente (es decir, incertidumbre en la
especificación del modelo).
Para muchos componentes en el modelo, no se dispuso de datos empíricos de dieta para el
POT, y aplicamos información de otras áreas de fuentes en la literatura. Teníamos datos directos
de dieta para los dos componentes de delfines, Atún aleta amarilla grande y pequeño, Atún patudo pequeño, Marlines grandes y pequeños, Pez vela grande y pequeño, Dorado grande y pequeño,
Tiburones grandes y pequeños, Peto grande y pequeño, y Atún barrilete, pero algunos de estos
componentes fueron representados por pocas muestras. Es de esperar que las dietas de muchos
de los animales de distribución geográfica amplia en este sistema grande con subsistemas variados (zonas de afloramiento y giros grandes, por ejemplo) sean variables, señalando la importancia de muestras grandes. No se dispuso de datos directos de dieta para muchos de los peces medianos y pequeños y los invertebrados en el POT.
Supusimos que las tasas de desplazamiento de animales entrando y saliendo del área del
modelo fueron aproximadamente iguales. Reconocemos que algunas especies altamente móviles
pueden extender sus distribuciones a latitudes más altas durante episodios de El Niño (Barber y
Chavez 1986). La aparición anómala de animales tropicales en regiones templadas es bien conocida porque es fácil observar que peces pelágicos grandes aparecen súbitamente en zonas donde
normalmente no viven. Parece probable, pero es más difícil de documentar, que individuos de la
misma especie entren al POT de la zona de agua cálida en el Pacífico occidental-central cuando el
frente entre dicha zona y la lengua de afloramiento ecuatorial se desplaza hacia el este durante
un evento de El Niño. Lehodey (2001) documenta desplazamientos de este tipo para el atún barrilete. Es posible que estos desplazamientos zonales compensen hasta cierto punto los desplazamientos hacia norte y sur del barrilete y otras especies pelágicas durante condiciones fuertes de ENOS.
Reconocemos que nuestro modelo de ecosistema no puede describir toda la complejidad que
caracteriza el sistema pelágico en el POT. Los modelos de ecosistemas son forzosamente un intermedio entre representaciones simplistas y una complejidad imposible de manejar. No obstante,
creemos que el modelo nos permite comprender mejor las relaciones entre las principales especies
en el ecosistema y desarrollar hipótesis importantes (por ejemplo, Watters et al. en prensa).
Creemos que el trabajo resumido en este documento puede formar la base de una evaluación de
los efectos ecológicos de estrategias alternativas de pesca en el POT.
RECONOCIMIENTOS
Una porción de este trabajo fue realizada como parte del grupo de trabajo sobre
Implicaciones Ecológicas de Estrategias Alternativas de Pesca de Depredadores Ápice subvencionado por el Centro Nacional para Análisis y Síntesis Ecológicos (NCEAS), financiado por la

202

OLSON Y WATTERS

Fundación Nacional para la Ciencia (Beca #DEB-94-21535), la Universidad de California en
Santa Barbara, y el estado de California. Apreciamos los esfuerzos de los miembros de este grupo
de trabajo para desarrollar y perfeccionar el modelo. Incluyen Kerim Aydin, Lisa Ballance,
Christofer Boggs, Timothy Essington, Paul Fiedler, Robert Francis, Marco García, James Kitchell,
Jeffrey Polovina, Stephen Reilly, y Carl Walters. Fueron asimismo importantes los aportes de los
participantes en el grupo de trabajo sobre Estudios y Modelado Ecológicos de la CIAT: Robin
Allen, Kerim Aydin, Richard Deriso, Elizabeth Edwards, Alain Fonteneau, Marco García, Martín
Hall, James Joseph, Elizabeth Logerwell, Hector Lopez, Hideki Nakano, Paul Smith, y Daniel
Ware. Reconocemos con gratitud la información inédita sobre aves marinas de Lisa Ballance
(NMFS, La Jolla) y sobre mamíferos marinos en el POT de Stephen Reilly (NMFS, La Jolla) y
Michael Scott (CIAT, La Jolla), y el trabajo sobre hábitos alimenticios de Felipe Galván Magaña
(CICIMAR, México), que mejoró mucho nuestros conocimientos de la estructura trófica en el POT.
Agradecemos a un árbitro anónimo, Fei Chai, y Mark Ohman la información sobre fitoplancton y
zooplancton. El manuscrito fue mejorado gracias a sugerencias de William Bayliff y el árbitro
anónimo. Agradecemos también a Nicholas Webb su traducción minuciosa de este boletín al
español.

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

203

REFERENCES−−REFERENCIAS
Aasen, O. 1966. Blåhaien, Prionace glauca (Linnaeus), 1758. Fisken og havet 1: 1-15.
Andersen, K.P., and E. Ursin. 1977. A multispecies extension to the Beverton and Holt theory of
fishing, with accounts of phosphorus circulation and primary production. Meddelelser fra
Danmarks Fiskeri- og Havunders-ogelser 7: 319-435.
Aurioles-Gamboa, D., and R. Perez-Flores. 1977. Seasonal and bathymetric changes in feeding
habits of the benthic red crab Pleuroncodes planipes (Decapoda, Anomura, Galatheidae) off
the Pacific coast of Baja California Sur, Mexico. Crustaceana 70 (3): 272-287.
Bailey, K., P.G. Williams, and D. Itano. 1996. By-catch and discards in western Pacific tuna fisheries: a review of SPC data holdings and literature. South Pacific Commission, Noumea, New
Caledonia. Oceanic Fisheries Program Tech. Rep. 34: 164 pp.
Ballance, L.T. 1995. Flight energetics of free-ranging red-footed boobies (Sula sula). Physiol. Zool.
68 (5): 887-914.
Ballance, L.T., and R.L. Pitman. 1999. Foraging ecology of tropical seabirds. In Adams, N.J., and
R.H. Slotow (eds.), Proc. 22 Int. Ornithol. Congr., Durban. BirdLife South Africa,
Johannesburg: 2057-2071.
Barber, R.T., and F.P. Chavez. 1986. Ocean variability in relation to living resources during the
1982/83 El Niño. Nature 319: 279-285.
Barber, R.T., M.P. Sanderson, S.T. Lindley, F. Chai, J. Newton, C.C. Trees, D.G. Foley, and F.P.
Chavez. 1996. Primary productivity and its regulation in the equatorial Pacific during and
following the 1991-1992 El Niño. Deep-Sea Res. II 43 (4-6): 933-969.
Bayliff, W.H. 1993. Growth and age composition of northern bluefin tuna, Thunnus thynnus,
caught in the eastern Pacific Ocean, as estimated from length-frequency data, with comments on trans-Pacific migrations. Inter-Am. Trop. Tuna Comm., Bull. 20 (9): 501-540.
Bayliff, W.H. 1994. A review of the biology and fisheries for northern bluefin tuna, Thunnus thynnus,
in the Pacific Ocean. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. 336 (2): 244-295.
Belokopytin, Y.S., and G.A. Abolmasova. 1988. Energetics of metabolism of flying-fishes of the
tropical Atlantic at various rates of swimming. J. Ichthyol. 28 (1): 148-151.
Berkeley, S.A., and E.D. Houde. 1983. Age determinations of broadbill swordfish, Xiphius gladius,
from the Straits of Florida, using anal fin spine sections. NOAA Tech. Rep. NMFS 8: 137-143.
Bertignac, M., and M. Yesaki. 1994. Preliminary assessment of the narrow-barred Spanish mackerel stock off Oman using catch-at-age data obtained from length-frequency distributions
by the Bhattacharya method. Proceedings of the 5th Expert Consultation on Indian Ocean
Tunas, Mahe, Seychelles. Indo-Pacific Tuna Prog. Collect. Vol., No. 8: 88-95.
Bigelow, H.B., and W.C. Schroeder. 1953. Sawfishes, guitarfishes, skates and rays. In Parr, A.E.
(ed.), Fishes of the Western North Atlantic, Part 2. Memoir Sears Foundation for Marine
Research, 1, Yale Univ., New Haven: 1-502.
Blackburn, M. 1977. Temporal changes in pelagic biomass of Pleuroncodes planipes Stimpson
(Decapoda Anomura, Galatheidae) off Baja California, Mexico. Crustaceana 32 (2): 178-184.
Blunt, C.E.J. 1960. Observations on the food habits of longline caught bigeye and yellowfin tuna
from the tropical eastern Pacific 1955-1956. Calif. Fish Game 46 (1): 69-80.
Boggs, C.H. 1989. Vital rate statistics for billfish stock assessment. In Stroud, R.H. (ed.), Planning
the Future of Billfishes: Research and Management in the 90s and Beyond. Proceedings of
the Second International Billfish Symposium, Kailua-Kona, Hawaii, August 1-5, 1988, Part
1: Fishery and Stock Synopses, Data Needs and Management. National Coalition for Marine
Conservation, Inc., Savannah, Georgia: 225-233.
Boudreau, P.R., and L.M. Dickie. 1992. Biomass spectra of aquatic ecosystems in relation to fisheries
yield. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 49: 1528-1538.

204

OLSON Y WATTERS

Branstetter, S. 1987a. Age and growth validation of newborn sharks held in laboratory aquaria,
with comments on the life history of the Atlantic sharpnose shark, Rhizoprionodon
terraenovae. Copeia 1987: 291-300.
Branstetter, S. 1987b. Age, growth and reproductive biology of the silky shark, Carcharhinus
falciformis, and the scalloped hammerhead, Sphyrna lewini, from the northwestern Gulf of
Mexico. Env. Biol. Fishes 19 (3): 161-173.
Branstetter, S., and J.A. Musick. 1994. Age and growth estimates of the sand tiger in the
Northwestern Atlantic Ocean. Trans. Am. Fish. Soc. 123: 242-254.
Branstetter, S., J.A. Musick, and J.A. Colvocoresses. 1987. A comparison of age and growth of the
tiger shark, Galeocerdo cuvieri, from off Virginia and from the northwestern Gulf of Mexico.
Fish. Bull. U.S. 85: 269-279.
Branstetter, S., and R. Stiles. 1987. Age and growth estimates of the bull shark, Carcharhinus
leucas, from the northern Gulf of Mexico. Env. Biol. Fishes 20: 169-181.
Brault, S., and H. Caswell. 1993. Pod-specific demography of killer whales (Orcinus orca). Ecology
74 (5): 1444-1454.
Breiman, L., J.H. Friedman, R.A. Olshen, and C.J. Stone. 1984. Classification and Regression
Trees. Chapman and Hall, New York, NY: 358 pp.
Brett, J.R., and T.D.D. Groves. 1979. Physiological energetics. In Hoar, W.S., D.J. Randall, and J.R.
Brett (eds.), Fish Physiology. Vol. VIII Bioenergetics and Growth. Academic Press, New York, NY:
279-352.
Brill, R.W. 1996. Selective advantages conferred by the high performance physiology of tunas, billfishes, and dolphin fish. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. 113A (1): 3-15.
Brown, C.S., and S.H. Gruber. 1988. Age assessment of the lemon shark, Negaprion brevirostris,
using tetracycline validated vertebral centra. Copeia 1988 (3): 747-753.
Bykov, V.P., G.P. Ionas, G.N. Golovkova, A.P. Didenko, V.N. Akulin, L.I. Perova, A.B. Odintsov, L.L.
Konstantinova, Y.F. Dvinin, G.S. Christoferzen, and L.P. Borisova. 2000. Chemical
Composition and Processing Properties of Marine and Ocean Fishes: Handbook. VNIRO
Publishing, Moscow: 376 pp.
Cailliet, G.M., and D.W. Bedford. 1983. The biology of three pelagic sharks from California waters,
and their emerging fisheries: a review. Calif. Coop. Oceanic Fish. Invest. Rep. XXIV: 57-69.
Campana, S.E., H.A. Oxenford, and J.N. Smith. 1993. Radiochemical determination of longevity
in flyingfish Hirundichthys affinis using Th-228/Ra-228. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 100 (3): 211-219.
Chai, F., R.C. Dugdale, T.-H. Peng, F.P. Wilkerson, and R.T. Barber. 2002. One-dimensional ecosystem model of the equatorial Pacific upwelling system. Part I: model development and silicon
and nitrogen cycle. Deep-Sea Research II. 49 (13-14): 2713-2745.
Chapman, D.G. 1980. Natural mortality rate-males. In Donovan, G. (ed.), Sperm Whales. Rep. Int.
Whal. Commn., Special Issue 2: 61.
Chavez, F.P., K.R. Buck, S.K. Service, J. Newton, and R.T. Barber. 1996. Phytoplankton variability
in the central and eastern tropical Pacific. Deep-Sea Res. II 43 (4-6): 835-870.
Christensen, V., and D. Pauly. (eds.). 1993. Trophic Models of Aquatic Ecosystems. ICLARM Conf.
Proc. 26: 390 pp.
Christensen, V., C. Walters, and D. Pauly. 2000. Ecopath with Ecosim: a User's Guide, October
2000 Edition. Fisheries Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada and
ICLARM, Penang, Malaysia: 130 pp.
Compagno, L.H.V. 1984. FAO Species Catalogue. Sharks of the World. An Annotated and
Illustrated Catalogue of Shark Species Known to Date. Part 1. Hexanchiformes to
Lamniformes. Rome. FAO Fish. Synop., 125. Vol. 4: 249 pp.

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

205

Cortés, E. 1997. A critical review of methods of studying fish feeding based on analysis of stomach contents: application to elasmobranch fishes. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 54: 726-738.
Cummings, W.C. 1985. Bryde's whale Balaenoptera edeni Anderson, 1878. In Ridgeway, S.H., and
R.J. Harrison (eds.), Handbook of Marine Mammals. Vol. 3 The sirenians and baleen whales.
Academic Press, London: 137-154.
Dagorn, L., F. Menczer, P. Bach, and R.J. Olson. 2000. Co-evolution of movement behaviours by
tropical pelagic predatory fishes in response to prey environment: a simulation model. Ecol.
Modelling 134 (2-3): 325-341.
Dalzell, P. 1993. The fisheries biology of flying fishes (Families: Exocoeticae and Hemiramphidae)
from the Camotes Sea, Central Philippines. J. Fish Biol. 43: 19-32.
Dam, H.G., X. Zhang, M. Butler, and M.R. Roman. 1995. Mesozooplankton grazing and
metabolism at the equator in the central Pacific: Implications for carbon and nitrogen fluxes.
Deep-Sea Res. II 42 (2-3): 735-756.
De Crosta, M.A., L.R. Taylor, Jr., and J.D. Parrish. 1984. Age determination, growth, and energetics
of three species of carcharhinid sharks in Hawaii. In Proceedings of the second symposium
on resource investigations of the NW Hawaiian Islands. Vol. 2. UNIHI-SEAGRANT-MR-8401 University of Hawaii Sea Grant, Honolulu: 75-95.
de Sylva, D.P. 1962. Red water blooms off northern Chile, April-May 1956, with reference
to the ecology of the swordfish and the striped marlin. Pac. Sci. 16: 271-279.
Dugdale, R.C., and F.P. Wilkerson. 1998. Silicate regulation of new production in the equatorial
Pacific upwelling. Nature 391: 270-273.
Ehrhardt, N.M. 1991. Potential impact of a seasonal migratory jumbo squid (Dosidicus gigas)
stock on a Gulf of California sardine (Sardinops sagax caerulea) population. Bull. Mar.
Sci. 49 (1-2): 325-332.
Ehrhardt, N.M., P.S. Jacquemin, F. Garcia-B., G. Gonzales-D., J.M. Lopez, J. Ortiz-C., and A. SolisN. 1983. Summary of the fishery and biology of the jumbo squid (Dosidicus gigas) in the
Gulf of California. Memoirs of the National Museum of Victoria 44: 305-311.
FAO. 1995. Code of conduct for responsible fisheries. FAO (U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization),
Rome: 41 pp.
Flint, E.N., and K.A. Nagy. 1984. Flight energetics of free-living sooty terns. The Auk 101: 288-294.
Froese, R., and D. Pauly (eds.). 2000. FishBase 2000: Concepts, Design and Data Sources. ICLARM, Los
Baños, Laguna, Philippines: 344 pp.
Furness, R.W., and P. Monaghan. 1987. Seabird Ecology. Chapman and Hall, New York, NY: 164 pp.
Gambell, R. 1985. Sei whale Balaenoptera borealis Lesson, 1828. In Ridgeway, S.H., and R.J.
Harrison (eds.), Handbook of Marine Mammals. Vol. 3 The Sirenians and Baleen Whales.
Academic Press, London: 155-170.
Gorelova, T.A. 1980. The feeding of young flyingfishes of the family Exocoetidae and of the smallwing
flyingfish, Oxyporhamphus micropterus, of the family Hemirhamphidae. J. Ichthyol. 20 (4): 60-71.
Hall, M.A. 1998. An ecological view of the tuna-dolphin problem: impacts and trade-offs. Rev. Fish
Biol. Fish. 8: 1-34.
Hampton, J., K. Bigelow, and M. Labelle. 1998. A summary of current information on the biology,
fisheries and stock assessment of bigeye tuna (Thunnus obesus) in the Pacific Ocean, with
recommendations for data requirements and future research. Secretariat of the Pacific
Community, Oceanic Fisheries Programme Tech. Rep. 36: 46 pp.
Hampton, J., and D. Fournier. 2000. Update to MULTIFAN-CL based assessment of South Pacific
albacore tuna. Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Standing Committee on Tuna and
Billfish 13. Working Paper ALB-1: 25 pp.

206

OLSON Y WATTERS

Hernández-García, V. 1995. The diet of the swordfish Xiphias gladius Linnaeus, 1758, in the central
east Atlantic, with emphasis on the role of cephalopods. Fish. Bull. U.S. 93 (2): 403-411.
Hinton, M.G., and W.H. Bayliff. 2002. Status of swordfish in the eastern Pacific Ocean. InterAmer. Trop. Tuna Comm., Stock Assessment Rep. 2: 297-338.
Hoenig, J.M. 1979. Growth rates of large sharks determined by vertebral rings. Ph.D. dissertation, Univ.
Rhode Island, Kingston: 85 pp.
IATTC. 1998. Annual report of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, 1996. Inter-Am.
Trop. Tuna Comm.: 306 pp.
IATTC. 1999a. Annual report of the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission, 1997. Inter-Am.
Trop. Tuna Comm.: 310 pp.
IATTC. 1999b. Working subgroup on ecological studies and modeling. Report of the 1st meeting.
April 26-28, 1999. Inter-Am. Trop. Tuna Comm., La Jolla, California, USA: 10 pp.
IGFA. 1999. World Record Game Fishes. International Game Fish Association, Dania Beach,
Florida: 352 pp.
Ikeda, T. 1977. Feeding rates of planktonic copepods from a tropical sea. J. Exp. Mar. Biol. Ecol.
29: 263-277.
Iversen, E.S., and H.O. Yoshida. 1957. Notes on the biology of the wahoo in the Line Islands. Pac.
Sci. 11: 370-379.
Juhl, R. 1955. Notes on the feeding habits of subsurface yellowfin and bigeye tunas of the eastern
tropical Pacific Ocean. Calif. Fish Game 41 (1): 99-101.
Killam, K.A., and G.R. Parsons. 1989. Age and growth of the blacktip shark, Carcharhinus limbatus,
near Tampa Bay, Florida. Fish. Bull. U.S. 87: 845-857.
King, J.E., and I.I. Ikehara. 1956. Comparative study of the food of the bigeye and yellowfin tuna
in the central Pacific. Fish. Bull. U.S. 57 (108): 61-85.
Kitchell, J.F., W.H. Neill, A.E. Dizon, and J.J. Magnuson. 1978. Bioenergetic spectra of skipjack
and yellowfin tunas. In Sharp, G.D., and A.E. Dizon (eds.), The Physiological Ecology of
Tunas. Academic Press, New York, NY: 357-368.
Koto, T. 1963. Some considerations on the growth of marlins, using size frequencies in commercial
catches. III. Attempts to estimate the growth of striped marlin, Tetrapturus audax
(Philippi) in the western North Pacific Ocean. Rep. Nankai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 17: 63-85.
Koto, T., and K. Kodama. 1962. Some considerations on the growth of marlins, using size
frequencies in commercial catches. I. Attempts to estimate the growth of sailfish. Rep.
Nankai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 15: 97-108.
Kume, S., and J. Joseph. 1966. Size composition, growth and sexual maturity of bigeye tuna,
Thunnus obesus (Lowe), from the Japanese long-line fishery in the eastern Pacific Ocean.
Inter-Am. Trop. Tuna Comm., Bull. 11 (2): 45-99.
Landry, M.R., J. Constantinou, and J. Kirshtein. 1995. Microzooplankton grazing in the central
equatorial Pacific during February and August, 1992. Deep-Sea Res. II 42 (2-3): 657-671.
Laurs, R.M., R. Lynn, R. Dotson, R. Nishimoto, K. Bliss, and D. Holts. 1982. Exploratory albacore
longline fishing in the eastern North Pacific during winter 1982. U S National Marine
Fisheries Service, Southwest Fisheries Center, Admin. Rep. LJ-82-06: 79 pp.
Lawson, T.A. (ed.) 2001. Secretariat of the Pacific Community Tuna Fishery Yearbook 2000.
Oceanic Fisheries Programme, Secretariat of the Pacific Community, Nouméa, New
Caledonia: 162 pp.
Lehodey, P. 2001. The pelagic ecosystem in the tropical Pacific Ocean: dynamic spatial modelling
and biological consequences of ENSO. Progress in Oceanography 49: 439-468.
Lewis, J.B. 1961. The growth, breeding cycle and food of the flyingfish Parexocoetus brachypterus
hillianus (Gosse). Bull. Mar. Sci. Gulf Caribb. 11 (2): 258-266.

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

207

Lipskaya, N.Y. 1980. The feeding and food requirements of the young of the smallwing flyingfish,
Oxyporhamphus micropterus (Hemirhamphidae). J. Ichthyol. 20 (4): 72-79.
Lipskaya, N.Y. 1987. Feeding of flyingfish (Exocoetidae) larvae and fingerlings in the region of the
Peruvian upwelling. J. Ichthyol. 27 (3): 108-116.
Longhurst, A.R. 1998. Ecological Geography of the Sea. Academic Press, San Diego, CA: 398 pp.
Longhurst, A.R., and D. Pauly. 1987. Ecology of Tropical Oceans. Academic Press, San Diego, CA:
407 pp.
Manooch, C.S.I., and W.T. Hogarth. 1983. Stomach contents and giant trematodes from wahoo,
Acanthocybium solandri, collected along the South Atlantic and Gulf Coasts of the United
States. Bull. Mar. Sci. 3: 1-27.
Markaida, U., and O. Sosa-Nishizaki. 1998. Food and feeding habits of swordfish, Xiphias gladius
L., off western Baja California. NOAA Tech. Rep. NMFS 142: 245-259.
Márquez, R.M. 1990. FAO species catalogue. Sea turtles of the world. An annotated and illustrated
catalogue of sea turtle species known to date. FAO Fish. Synop. 125 Vol. 11: 81 pp.
Maunder, M.N., and G.M. Watters. 2001. Status of yellowfin tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean.
Inter-Amer. Trop. Tuna Comm., Stock Assessment Rep. 1: 5-86.
Maunder, M.N., and G.M. Watters. 2002. Status of yellowfin tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean.
Inter-Amer. Trop. Tuna Comm., Stock Assessment Rep. 2: 5-90.
Maynou, F., and J.E. Cartes. 1998. Daily ration estimates and comparative study of food
consumption in nine species of deep-water decapod crustaceans of the NW Mediterranean.
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 171: 221-231.
Misund, O.A., and A.K. Beltestad. 1994. Size-selection of mackerel and saithe in purse seine. ICES
C.M. 1994/B:28, Ref. G.H.: 1-12.
Morita, Y. 1973. Conversion factors for estimating live weight from gill-and-gutted weight of big
eye and yellowfin tunas. Bull. Far Seas Fish. Res. Lab. 9: 109-121.
Muck, P., and D. Pauly. 1987. Monthly anchoveta consumption of guano birds, 1953-1982. In
Pauly, D., and I. Tsukayama (eds.), The Peruvian anchoveta and its upwelling ecosystem: three decades of change. Vol. 15 ICLARM Studies and Reviews: 219-233.
Murawski, S.A. 1984. Mixed-species yield-per-recruit analyses accounting for technological inter
actions. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 41: 897-916.
Murray, T. 1994. A review of the biology and fisheries for albacore, Thunnus alalunga, in the
south Pacific Ocean. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. 336 (2): 188-206.
Nakamura, E.L., and J.H. Uchiyama. 1966. Length-weight relations of Pacific tunas. In Manar,
T.A. (ed.), Proceedings of the Governor's Conference on Central Pacific Fishery Resources.
State of Hawaii, Honolulu: 197-201.
Nakamura, I. 1985. FAO species catalogue. Billfishes of the world. An annotated and illustrated
catalogue of marlins, sailfishes, spearfishes and swordfishes known to date. FAO Fish.
Synop. 125 Vol. 5: 65 pp.
Nakano, H., M. Okazaki, and H. Okamoto. 1997. Analysis of catch depth by species for tuna longline
fishery based on catch by branch lines. Bull. Nat. Res. Inst. Far Seas Fish. 34: 43-62.
Natanson, L.J., J.G. Casey, and N.E. Kohler. 1995. Age and growth estimates for the dusky shark,
Carcharhinus obscurus, in the western North Atlantic Ocean. Fish. Bull. U.S. 93: 116-126.
Nelson, J.B. 1978. The Sulidae: Gannets and Boobies. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford: 1012 pp.
Nixon, M. 1987. Cephalopod diets. In Boyle, P.R. (ed.), Cephalopod Life Cycles. Vol. II
Comparative Reviews. Academic Press, London: 201-219.
Notarbartolo-di-Sciara, G. 1988. Natural history of the rays of the genus Mobula in the Gulf of
California. Fish. Bull. U.S. 86 (1): 45-66.

208

OLSON Y WATTERS

NRC. 1999. Sustaining Marine Fisheries. National Research Council. National Academy Press,
Washington D.C.: 164 pp.
Okada, Y. 1955. Fishes of Japan. Maruzen Co., Ltd., Tokyo: 462 pp.
Olson, R.J., and C.H. Boggs. 1986. Apex predation by yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares): independent estimates from gastric evacuation and stomach contents, bioenergetics, and cesium
concentrations. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 43 (9): 1760-1775.
Olson, R.J., and F. Galván-Magaña. 2002. Food habits and consumption rates of common dolphinfish
(Coryphaena hippurus) in the eastern Pacific Ocean. Fish. Bull. U.S. 100 (2): 279-298.
Opitz, S. 1996. Trophic interactions in Caribbean coral reefs. ICLARM Tech. Rep. 43: 341 pp.
Oxenford, H.A., R. Mahon, and W. Hunte. 1995. Distribution and relative abundance of flyingfish
(Exocoetidae) in the eastern Caribbean. I. Adults. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 117: 11-23.
Palko, B.J., G.L. Beardsley, and W.J. Richards. 1982. Synopsis of the biological data on dolphin-fishes,
Coryphaena hippurus Linnaeus and Coryphaena equiselis Linnaeus. NOAA Tech. Rep.
NMFS Circ. 443: 1-28.
Parsons, G.R. 1993. Age determination and growth of the bonnethead shark Sphyrna tiburo: a
comparison of two populations. Mar. Biol. 117: 23-31.
Pauly, D. 1980. On the interrelationship between natural mortality, growth parameters, and mean
environmental temperature in 175 fish stocks. J. Cons. int. Explor. Mer 39 (2): 175-192.
Pauly, D., and V. Christensen. 1996. Mass-balance models of north-eastern Pacific ecosystems.
Fish. Cent. Res. Rep. 4 (1): 1-131.
Phillips, A.M., Jr. 1969. Nutrition, digestion, and energy utilization. In Hoar, W.S., and D.J.
Randall (eds.), Fish Physiology. Vol. 1 Academic Press, New York: 391-432.
Pinkas, L., M.S. Oliphant, and I.L.K. Iverson. 1971. Food habits of albacore, bluefin tuna, and
bonito in California waters. Cal. Fish. Game, Fish Bull. 152: 1-105.
Polovina, J.J. 1984. Model of a coral reef ecosystem I. The ecopath model and its application to
French Frigate Shoals. Coral Reefs 3: 1-10.
Pope, J.G. 1979. A modified cohort analysis in which constant natural mortality is replaced by
estimates of predation levels. ICES C.M. 1979/H: 16.
Pratt, H.L., Jr., and J.G. Casey. 1983. Age and growth of the shortfin mako, Isurus oxyrinchus,
using four methods. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 40: 1944-1957.
Radtke, R.L., and P.C.F. Hurley. 1983. Age estimation and growth of broadbill swordfish, Xiphius
gladius, from the northwest Atlantic based on external features of otoliths. NOAA Tech.
Rep. NMFS 8: 145-150.
Rodriguez, J., and M.M. Mullin. 1986. Relation between biomass and body weight of plankton in
a steady state oceanic ecosystem. Limnol. Oceanogr. 31 (2): 361-370.
Schaefer, K.M. 1996. Spawning time, frequency, and batch fecundity of yellowfin tuna, Thunnus
albacares, near Clipperton Atoll in the eastern Pacific Ocean. Fish. Bull. U.S. 94 (1): 98-112.
Schaefer, K.M. 1998. Reproductive biology of yellowfin tuna (Thunnus albacares) in the eastern
Pacific Ocean. Inter-Am. Trop. Tuna Comm., Bull. 21 (5): 201-272.
SEFC. 1987. Report of the swordfish assessment workshop. [U.S. National Marine Fisheries
Service] Southeast Fisheries Center. Intl. Comm. Cons. Atlantic Tunas, Collective Vol. Sci.
Papers 26 (2): 339-395.
Shannon, L.J., and A. Jarre-Teichmann. 1999. A model of trophic flows in the northern Benguela
upwelling system during the 1980s. S. Afr. J. Mar. Sci 21: 349-366.
Shchetinnikov, A.S. 1992. Feeding spectrum of squid Sthenoteuthis oualaniensis (Oegopsida) in
the eastern Pacific. J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U. K. 72: 849-860.
Shomura, R.S., and B.A. Keala. 1963. Growth and sexual dimorphism in growth of bigeye tuna
(Thunnus obesus). A preliminary report. FAO Fish. Rep. 6 (3): 1409-1417.

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

209

Sidwell, V.D. 1981. Chemical and nutritional composition of finfish, whales, crustaceans, mollusks,
and their products. NOAA Tech. Memo. NMFS F/SEC 11: 432.
Skillman, R.A., and M.Y.Y. Yong. 1974. Length-weight relationships for six species of billfishes in
the central Pacific Ocean. NOAA Tech. Rep. NMFS SSRF 675 (2): 126-137.
Skillman, R.A., and M.Y.Y. Yong. 1976. Von Bertalanffy growth curves for striped marlin,
Tetrapturus audax, and blue marlin, Makaira nigricans, in the central North Pacific Ocean.
Fish. Bull. U.S. 74 (3): 553-566.
Smith, S.E., D.W. Au, and C. Show. 1998. Intrinsic rebound potentials of 26 species of Pacific
sharks. Mar. Freshwater Res. 49: 663-678.
Stevens, J.D. 1975. Vertebral rings as a means of age determination in the blue shark (Prionace
glauca L.). J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. U. K. 55: 657-665.
Stevens, J.D. 1983. Observations on reproduction in the shortfin mako, Isurus oxyrinchus. Copeia
1983: 126-130.
Stillwell, C.E., and N.E. Kohler. 1985. Food and feeding ecology of the swordfish Xiphias gladius
in the western North Atlantic Ocean with estimates of daily ration. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 22: 239-247.
Suda, A., and S. Kume. 1967. Survival and recruit of bigeye tuna in the Pacific Ocean, estimated
by the data of tuna longline catch. Rep. Nankai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 1: 99-114.
Tester, A.L., and E.L. Nakamura. 1957. Catch rate, size, sex, and food of tunas and other pelagic
fishes taken by trolling off Oahu, Hawaii, 1951-55. U.S. Fish and Wildlf. Serv. Spec. Sci. Rep.
Fish. 250: 1-25.
Trites, A.W., P.A. Livingston, M.C. Vasconcellos, S. Mackinson, A.M. Springer, and D. Pauly. 1999.
Ecosystem change and the decline of marine mammals in the eastern Bering Sea: testing
the ecosystem shift and commercial whaling hypothesis. Fish. Cent. Res. Rep. 7: 1-100.
Tyler, J.A., and K.A. Rose. 1994. Individual variability and spatial heterogeneity in fish population
models. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 4 (1): 91-123.
Uchiyama, J.H., R.K. Burch, and S.A. Kraul, Jr. 1986. Growth of dolphins, Coryphaena hippurus
and C. equiselis, in Hawaiian waters as determined by daily increments on otoliths. Fish.
Bull. U.S. 84 (1): 186-191.
Uchiyama, J.H., R.A. Skillman, J.D. Sampaga, and E.E. DeMartini. 1998. A preliminary assessment of
the use of hard parts to age central Pacific swordfish, Xiphias gladius. NOAA Tech. Rep.
NMFS 142: 261-273.
Uosaki, K., and W.H. Bayliff. 1999. A review of the Japanese longline fishery for tunas and billfishes
in the eastern Pacific Ocean, 1988-1992. Inter-Am. Trop. Tuna Comm., Bull. 21 (6): 273-488.
Valiela, I. 1984. Marine Ecological Processes. Springer-Verlag, New York: 546 pp.
Verity, P.G., D.K. Stoecker, M.E. Sieracki, and J.R. Nelson. 1996. Microzooplankton grazing of
primary production at 140º W in the equatorial Pacific. Deep-Sea Res. II 43 (4-6): 1227-1255.
Vinogradov, M.Y., E.A. Shushkina, and I.N. Kukina. 1976. Functional characteristics of a planktonic
community in an equatorial upwelling region. Oceanology 16: 67-76.
Wade, P.R., and T. Gerrodette. 1993. Estimates of cetacean abundance and distribution in the
eastern tropical Pacific. Rep. Int. Whal. Commn. 43: 477-493.
Walters, C., V. Christensen, and D. Pauly. 1997. Structuring dynamic models of exploited ecosystems
from trophic mass-balance assessments. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 7: 139-172.
Walters, C., D. Pauly, V. Christensen, and J. Kitchell. 2000. Representing density dependent con
sequences of life history strategies in aquatic ecosytems: EcoSim II. Ecosystems 3: 70-83.
Wares, P.W., and G.T. Sakagawa. 1974. Some morphometrics of billfishes from the eastern Pacific
Ocean. NOAA Tech. Rep. NMFS SSRF 675 (2): 107-120.
Warham, J. 1990. The Petrels: Their Ecology and Breeding Systems. Academic Press, London: 440 pp.

210

OLSON Y WATTERS

Warham, J. 1996. The Behaviour, Population Biology and Physiology of the Petrels. Academic
Press, London: 613 pp.
Watters, G.M., and M.N. Maunder. 2001. Status of bigeye tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean. InterAmer. Trop. Tuna Comm., Stock Assessment Rep. 1: 109-210.
Watters, G.M., and M.N. Maunder. 2002. Status of bigeye tuna in the eastern Pacific Ocean. InterAmer. Trop. Tuna Comm., Stock Assessment Rep. 2: 147-246.
Watters, G.M., R.J. Olson, R.C. Francis, P.C. Fiedler, J.J. Polovina, S.B. Reilly, K.Y. Aydin, C.H.
Boggs, T.E. Essington, C.J. Walters, and J.F. Kitchell. In press. Physical forcing and the
dynamics of the pelagic ecosystem in the eastern tropical Pacific: simulations with ENSOscale and global-warming climate drivers. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci.
Wells, R.S., and M.D. Scott. 1990. Estimating bottlenose dolphin population parameters from
individual identification and capture-release techniques. Rep. Int. Whal. Commn. Special
Issue 12: 407-415.
Wetherbee, B.M., G.L. Crow, and C.G. Lowe. 1996. Biology of the Galapagos shark, Carcharhinus
galapagensis, in Hawaii. Env. Biol. Fishes 45: 299-310.
Whitley, G.P. 1964. Scombroid fishes of Australia and New Zealand. Proc. Symp. Scombroid
Fishes, Part I. Mar. Biol. Assoc. India, Symp. Ser. 1: 221-253.
Wild, A. 1986. Growth of yellowfin tuna, Thunnus albacares, in the eastern Pacific Ocean based
on otolith increments. Inter-Am. Trop. Tuna Comm., Bull. 18 (6): 421-482.
Wintner, S.P., and G. Cliff. 1996. Age and growth determination of the blacktip shark,
Carcharhinus limbatus, from the east coast of South Africa. Fish. Bull. U.S. 94: 135-144.
Yabe, H., S. Ueyanagi, S. Kikawa, and H. Watanabe. 1959. Study on the life-history of the swordfish,
Xiphius gladius Linnaeus. Rep. Nankai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 10: 107-150.
Yochem, P.K., and S. Leatherwood. 1985. Blue whale Balaenoptera musculus (Linnaeus, 1758). In
Ridgeway, S.H., and R.J. Harrison (eds.), Handbook of Marine Mammals. Vol. 3 The
Sirenians and Baleen Whales. Academic Press, London: 193-240.
Yokota, T., M. Toriyama, F. Kanai, and S. Nomura. 1961. Studies on the feeding habit of fishes.
Rep. Nankai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 14: 1-234.
Yoshida, H.O. 1979. Synopsis of biological data on tunas of the genus Euthynnus. NOAA Tech.
Rep. NMFS Circ. 429: 1-57.
Yukinawa, M., and Y. Yabuta. 1963. Age and growth of bigeye tuna, Parathunnus mebachi
(Kishinouye). Rep. Nankai Reg. Fish. Res. Lab. 19: 103-119.

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

211

APPENDIX
The first version of the ecosystem model for the pelagic eastern tropical Pacific Ocean
(ETP1) had 34 components; some of these were aggregated or disaggregated to help balance the
model (see Balancing the model), and some new ones recommended by reviewers were added
(see MODEL REVIEW). The initial set of parameter estimates used in ETP1 are presented in
the following tables. Our subjective confidence ratings of the parameters in Appendix Tables 1a
and 2a are noted.
ANEXO
La primera versión del modelo del ecosistema de Oceáno Pacífico tropical oriental pelágico
(ETP1) tenía 34 componentes; algunos fueron agregados o desagregados para ayudar a balancear
el modelo (ver Balance del modelo), y fueron añadidos unos nuevos recomendados durante la
revisión del modelo (ver REVISIÓN DEL MODELO). En las tablas siguientes se presentan las
estimaciones iniciales de los parámetros usadas en ETP1. Se señala nuestra clasificación subjetiva de confianza en los parámetros en Anexo Tablas 1b y 2b.

OLSON Y WATTERS

212

APPENDIX TABLE 1a. Initial parameter estimates for the first version of the model (ETP1). The abbreviations are as follows: B = biomass; P/B = production/biomass ratio; Q/B = consumption/biomass ratio; EE
= ecotrophic efficiency; U/Q = unassimilated fraction of the diet of each component. Our relative confidence
in the estimates is identified by footnotes. See Table 2a for the parameter estimates used in the final version of the model (ETP7).
Component
Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Toothed whales
Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins
Sea turtles
Large yellowfin tuna
Large bigeye tuna
Large marlins
Large sailfish
Large dorado
Large miscellaneous piscivores
Large sharks
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Auxis spp.
Small yellowfin tuna
Small bigeye tuna
Small marlins
Small sailfish
Small dorado
Small miscellaneous piscivores
Small sharks
Anchovies
Flyingfishes
Miscellaneous epipelagic fishes
Miscellaneous mesopelagic fishes
Epipelagic cephalopods
Mesopelagic cephalopods
Crabs
Zooplankton
Phytoplankton
Available detritus
Deep detritus
1 High confidence
2 Medium confidence
3 Low confidence

B
P/B
(tons·million km-2) (year-1)

30,540.271
3,469.121
16,885.761
6,522.071
13,738.172

658.842
401.862
230.492
54,834.912
8,184.272
4,679.792
1,423.412
167.382
271.132
32,616.873
2,000,000.003

0.102
0.153
0.033
0.043
0.043
0.152
2.351
0.762
1.003
1.733
0.803
1.752
0.442
0.252
1.882
1.502
1.141
0.722
0.503
0.573
0.842
1.752
0.312
0.921
2.883
2.073
2.003
1.042
1.042
2.283
46.231
56.003

Q/B
(year-1)
56.902
73.003
8.092
16.503
16.503
3.503
15.601
13.032
8.742
9.782
15.603
5.872
7.812
3.913
21.503
21.503
18.301
15.252
10.232
11.442
18.303
10.362
9.763
16.401
25.783
10.782
10.783
26.832
26.832
3.613
282.003

EE

U/Q

0.903
0.903

0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203

0.703
0.903
0.903
0.903

0.903

0.903
0.903

0.803
0.803
0.903
0.703
0.803
0.803
0.462

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO

213

ANEXO TABLA 1b. Estimaciones iniciales de los parámetros de la primera versión del modelo (ETP1). B
= biomasa; P/B = cociente producción/biomasa; Q/B = cociente consumo/biomasa; EE = eficacia ecotrófica;
U/Q = fracción no asimilada de la dieta de cada componente. Se señala con superíndices nuestra confianza
relativa en las estimaciones. Ver Tabla 2b para las estimaciones de los parámetros usados en la versión final
del modelo (ETP7).
Componente

B
P/B
(toneladas·millón km-2) (año-1)

Aves de caza
Aves forrajeras
Ballenas dentadas
Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos
Tortugas marinas
Atún aleta amarilla grande
Atún patudo grande
Marlines grandes
Pez vela grande
Dorado grande
Piscívoros misceláneos grandes
Tiburones grandes
Rayas
Atún barrilete
Auxis spp.
Atún aleta amarilla pequeño
Atún patudo pequeño
Marlines pequeños
Pez vela pequeño
Dorado pequeño
Piscívoros misceláneos pequeños
Tiburones pequeños
Anchoas
Peces voladores
Peces epipelágicos misceláneos
Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos
Cefalópodos epipelágicos
Cefalópodos mesopelágicos
Cangrejos
Zooplancton
Fitoplancton
Detritos disponibles
Detritos profundos
1 Confianza alta
2 Confianza mediana
3 Confianza baja

30,540.271
3,469.121
16,885.761
6,522.071

13,738.172

658.842
401.862
230.492
54,834.912
8,184.272
4,679.792
1,423.412
167.382
271.132
32,616.873
2,000,000.003

0.102
0.153
0.033
0.043
0.043
0.152
2.351
0.762
1.003
1.733
0.803
1.752
0.442
0.252
1.882
1.502
1.141
0.722
0.503
0.573
0.842
1.752
0.312
0.921
2.883
2.073
2.003
1.042
1.042
2.283
46.231
56.003

Q/B
(año-1)
56.902
73.003
8.092
16.503
16.503
3.503
15.601
13.032
8.742
9.782
15.603
5.872
7.812
3.913
21.503
21.503
18.301
15.252
10.232
11.442
18.303
10.362
9.763
16.401
25.783
10.782
10.783
26.832
26.832
3.613
282.003

EE

U/Q

0.903
0.903

0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203
0.203

0.703
0.903
0.903
0.903

0.903

0.903
0.903

0.803
0.803
0.903
0.703
0.803
0.803
0.462

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Toothed whales
Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins
Sea turtles
Large yellowfin tuna
Large bigeye tuna
Large marlins
Large sailfish
Large dorado
Large miscellaneous piscivores
Large sharks
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Auxis spp.
Small yellowfin tuna
Small bigeye tuna
Small marlins
Small sailfish
Small dorado
Small miscellaneous piscivores
Small sharks
Anchovies
Flyingfishes
Miscellaneous epipelagic fishes
Miscellaneous mesopelagic fishes
Epipelagic cephalopods
Mesopelagic cephalopods
Crabs
Zooplankton
Phytoplankton
Available detritus
Deep detritus

Prey

0.0053

0.0503
0.3953
0.1003
0.0503
0.4003

1

0.0053

0.2003
0.4453

0.3003
0.0503

2

0.0053

0.0053

0.0111

0.1801
0.0921
0.2821
0.1471
0.0551

0.0111
0.0141

0.0353
0.0503
0.0153
0.0203
0.0203
0.0033
0.6643
0.0033

0.0011
0.2021

4

0.0403
0.0603
0.0603
0.0253

3

0.0053

0.3731
0.5081
0.0221
0.0231
0.0351

0.0341

5

0.1753
0.1753
0.0253
0.0253
0.1003
0.4603
0.0303
0.0103

6

0.0053

0.0501
0.2861
0.0481
0.0171
0.0191
0.0081
0.0021

0.0041
0.0171

0.0051
0.5371
0.0021

7

0.0053

0.1012
0.0592
0.6412
0.0262
0.0632

0.0852

0.0202

8

Predator

0.0053

0.0841
0.0111

0.0053

0.0101

0.0731
0.3651
0.0821
0.0081

0.0053
0.0053
0.0311
0.2961

0.0053
0.0053
0.0241
0.0491
0.0061
0.0601

0.0051
0.1051

0.0053

0.0053

10

0.2181
0.2251
0.2681

0.0203
0.0203

9

0.0053

0.5461
0.0641
0.1461
0.0941
0.0131
0.0151

0.0181
0.0491

0.0351
0.0151

11

0.0053

0.1521
0.1301
0.0731
0.1221
0.0031
0.0461

0.0221
0.1261

0.0321
0.2231
0.0591
0.0071

12

0.0203

0.0071
0.0111
0.3931
0.0111
0.1011
0.0141
0.0141

0.1391
0.0511
0.0981
0.0101
0.0031
0.0031
0.0191
0.0801

0.0063
0.0103
0.0103

13

0.0503
0.7503

0.0503

0.1003

0.0503

14

0.0053

0.0031
0.0151

0.0061
0.0121
0.0171
0.1761
0.3031

0.3861

0.0771

15

APPENDIX TABLE 2a. Diet matrix for the first version of the model (ETP1). Our relative confidence in the estimates is identified by footnotes. See Table 3a for the diet matrix used in the final
version of the model (ETP7).

214

OLSON Y WATTERS

Pursuit birds
Grazing birds
Toothed whales
Spotted dolphin
Mesopelagic dolphins
Sea turtles
Large yellowfin tuna
Large bigeye tuna
Large marlins
Large sailfish
Large dorado
Large miscellaneous piscivores
Large sharks
Rays
Skipjack tuna
Auxis spp.
Small yellowfin tuna
Small bigeye tuna
Small marlins
Small sailfish
Small dorado
Small miscellaneous piscivores
Small sharks
Anchovies
Flyingfishes
Miscellaneous epipelagic fishes
Miscellaneous mesopelagic fishes
Epipelagic cephalopods
Mesopelagic cephalopods
Crabs
Zooplankton
Phytoplankton
Available detritus
Deep detritus

1 High confidence
2 Medium confidence
3 Low confidence

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Prey

16

0.0053

0.0603
0.1003

0.0303

0.2503
0.1003
0.3953

0.0103
0.0503

APPENDIX TABLE 2a. (continued)

0.0053

0.0721
0.4421
0.2521
0.1461
0.0341
0.0101
0.0031

0.0061
0.0071

0.0021
0.0191
0.0021

17

0.0103
0.0503

0.0103
0.0103

19

0.0053 0.0053

0.0503
0.2003
0.0603
0.0503
0.0103
0.0103
0.1003
0.0201 0.2003
0.0053
0.0303
0.0351
0.2181 0.1003
0.5701
0.1241 0.1003
0.0081
0.0201

18

0.0053

0.1501
0.1001
0.2451
0.0501

0.0501
0.2001

0.1001
0.0501

0.0501

20

0.0053

0.4341
0.0961
0.1211
0.1401
0.0061
0.0221

0.0271
0.0741

0.0531
0.0221

21

0.0303

0.2202

0.0302
0.0702
0.4502
0.0302
0.1202

0.0502

22

0.0203

0.0921
0.0051
0.0121

0.0101
0.0641

0.1271
0.0461
0.5201
0.0091
0.0031
0.0031
0.0181
0.0711

0.9602
0.0302
0.0103

24

Predator
23

0.0053

0.9952

25

0.1503
0.5503
0.2003
0.1003

26

0.1003

0.9003

27

0.0053

0.0503
0.0303
0.1003
0.3453
0.1503
0.0403
0.0603
0.1203

0.1003

28

0.0503

0.1203

0.0503
0.4503
0.1503
0.1303

0.0503

29

0.5503
0.1003
0.3503

30

0.5552
0.3282
0.1173

31

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO
215

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Aves de cazas
Aves forrajeras
Ballenas dentadas
Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos
Tortugas marinas
Atún aleta amarilla grande
Atún patudo grande
Marlines grandes
Pez vela grande
Dorado grande
Piscívoros misceláneos grandes
Tiburones grandes
Rayas
Atún barrilete
Auxis spp.
Atún aleta amarilla pequeño
Atún patudo pequeño
Marlines pequeños
Pez vela pequeño
Dorado pequeño
Piscívoros misceláneos pequeños
Tiburones pequeños
Anchoas
Peces voladores
Peces epipelágicos misceláneos
Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos
Cefalópodos epipelágicos
Cefalópodos mesopelágicos
Cangrejos
Zooplancton
Fitoplankton
Detritos disponibles
Detritos profundos

Presa

0.0053

0.0503
0.3953
0.1003
0.0503
0.4003

1

0.0053

0.2003
0.4453

0.3003
0.0503

2

0.0053

0.0053

0.0111

0.1801
0.0921
0.2821
0.1471
0.0551

0.0111
0.0141

0.0353
0.0503
0.0153
0.0203
0.0203
0.0033
0.6643
0.0033

0.0011
0.2021

4

0.0403
0.0603
0.0603
0.0253

3

0.0053

0.3731
0.5081
0.0221
0.0231
0.0351

0.0341

5

0.1753
0.1753
0.0253
0.0253
0.1003
0.4603
0.0303
0.0103

6

0.0053

0.0501
0.2861
0.0481
0.0171
0.0191
0.0081
0.0021

0.0041
0.0171

0.0051
0.5371
0.0021

7

0.0053

0.1012
0.0592
0.6412
0.0262
0.0632

0.0852

0.0202

8

Depredador

0.0053

0.0841
0.0111

0.0053

0.0101

0.0731
0.3651
0.0821
0.0081

0.0053
0.0053
0.0311
0.2961

0.0053
0.0053
0.0241
0.0491
0.0061
0.0601

0.0051
0.1051

0.0053

0.0053

10

0.2181
0.2251
0.2681

0.0203
0.0203

9

0.0053

0.5461
0.0641
0.1461
0.0941
0.0131
0.0151

0.0181
0.0491

0.0351
0.0151

11

0.0053

0.1521
0.1301
0.0731
0.1221
0.0031
0.0461

0.0221
0.1261

0.0321
0.2231
0.0591
0.0071

12

0.0203

0.0071
0.0111
0.3931
0.0111
0.1011
0.0141
0.0141

0.1391
0.0511
0.0981
0.0101
0.0031
0.0031
0.0191
0.0801

0.0063
0.0103
0.0103

13

0.0503
0.7503

0.0503

0.1003

0.0503

14

0.0053

0.0031
0.0151

0.0061
0.0121
0.0171
0.1761
0.3031

0.3861

0.0771

15

ANEXO TABLA 2b. Matriz de dietas para la primera versión del modelo (ETP1). Se señala con superíndices nuestra confianza relativa en las estimaciones. Ver Tabla 3b para la matriz de dietas
usada en la versión final del modelo (ETP7).

216

OLSON Y WATTERS

Aves de caza
Aves forrajeras
Ballenas dentadas
Delfín manchado
Delfines mesopelágicos
Tortugas marinas
Atún aleta amarilla grande
Atún patudo grande
Marlines grandes
Pez vela grande
Dorado grande
Piscívoros misceláneos grandes
Tiburones grandes
Rayas
Atún barrilete
Auxis spp.
Atún aleta amarilla pequeño
Atún patudo pequeño
Marlines pequeños
Pez vela pequeño
Dorado pequeño
Piscívoros misceláneos pequeños
Tiburones pequeños
Anchoas
Peces voladores
Peces epipelágicos misceláneos
Peces mesopelágicos misceláneos
Cefalópodos epipelágicos
Cefalópodos mesopelágicos
Cangrejos
Zooplancton
Fitoplankton
Detritos disponibles
Detritos profundos

1 Confianza alta
2 Confianza mediana
3 Confianza baja

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28
29
30
31
32
33
34

Presa

ANEXO TABLA 2b. (continuación)

0.0053

0.0603
0.1003

0.0303

0.2503
0.1003
0.3953

0.0103
0.0503

16

0.0053

0.0721
0.4421
0.2521
0.1461
0.0341
0.0101
0.0031

0.0061
0.0071

0.0021
0.0191
0.0021

17

0.0103
0.0503

0.0103
0.0103

19

0.0053 0.0053

0.0503
0.2003
0.0603
0.0503
0.0103
0.0103
0.1003
0.0201 0.2003
0.0053
0.0303
0.0351
0.2181 0.1003
0.5701
0.1241 0.1003
0.0081
0.0201

18

0.0053

0.1501
0.1001
0.2451
0.0501

0.0501
0.2001

0.1001
0.0501

0.0501

20

0.0053

0.4341
0.0961
0.1211
0.1401
0.0061
0.0221

0.0271
0.0741

0.0531
0.0221

21

0.0303

0.2202

0.0302
0.0702
0.4502
0.0302
0.1202

0.0502

22

0.0203

0.0921
0.0051
0.0121

0.0101
0.0641

0.1271
0.0461
0.5201
0.0091
0.0031
0.0031
0.0181
0.0711

23

0.9602
0.0302
0.0103

24

Depredador

0.0053

0.9952

25

0.1503
0.5503
0.2003
0.1003

26

0.1003

0.9003

27

0.0053

0.0503
0.0303
0.1003
0.3453
0.1503
0.0403
0.0603
0.1203

0.1003

28

0.0503

0.1203

0.0503
0.4503
0.1503
0.1303

0.0503

29

0.5503
0.1003
0.3503

30

0.5552
0.3282
0.1173

31

MODELO DEL ECOSISTEMA PELÁGICO
217

OLSON Y WATTERS

218

APPENDIX TABLE 3. Minimum and maximum times that animals spend in the small stages relative to
expectations from growth models, for the first version of the model (ETP1). These were estimated from visual assessments of variation in age at length (see references in Table 8a).
ANEXO TABLA 3. Período máximo y mínimo pasado en la etapa pequeña relativo a lo esperado de modelos de crecimiento, para la primera versión del modelo (ETP1); estimados a partir de evaluaciones visuales
de variación en edad a talla (ver referencias en Tabla 8b).

Split-pool component
Componente dividido

Minimum
Mínimo

Maximum
Máximo

Yellowfin tuna−Atún aleta amarilla

0.99

1.28

Bigeye tuna−Atún patudo

1.19

1.19

Marlins−Marlines

0.72

1.44

Sailfish−Pez vela
Dorado−Dorado

0.68
0.88
Not a component in ETP1
No fue componente en ETP1
0.89
1.71

Wahoo−Peto

1.04

1.44

Sharks−Tiburones

0.33

1.97

Swordfish−Pez espada

The IATTC’s responsibilities are met with two
programs, the Tuna-Billfish Program and the
Tuna-Dolphin Program. The principal responsibilities of the Tuna-Billfish Program are (1) to study
the biology of the tunas and related species of the
eastern Pacific Ocean to estimate the effects that
fishing and natural factors have on their abundance, (2) to recommend appropriate conservation
measures so that the stocks of fish can be maintained at levels that will afford maximum sustainable catches, and (3) to collect information on compliance with Commission resolutions. The principal
responsibilities of the Tuna-Dolphin Program are
(1) to monitor the abundance of dolphins and their
mortality incidental to purse-seine fishing in the
eastern Pacific Ocean, (2) to study the causes of
mortality of dolphins during fishing operations and
promote the use of fishing techniques and equipment that minimize these mortalities, (3) to study
the effects of different modes of fishing on the various fish and other animals of the pelagic ecosystem,
and (4) to provide a secretariat for the International
Dolphin Conservation Program.
An important part of the work of the IATTC is
the prompt publication and wide distribution of its
research results. The Commission publishes its
results in its Bulletin, Special Report, and Data
Report series, all of which are issued on an irregular basis, and its Stock Assessment Reports, which
are published annually.
The Commission also publishes Annual Reports
and Quarterly Reports, which include policy actions
of the Commission, information on the fishery, and
reviews of the year's or quarter's work carried out
by the staff. The Annual Reports also contain
financial statements and a roster of the IATTC
staff.
Additional information on the IATTC’s publications can be found in its web site.

La CIAT cumple sus obligaciones mediante dos
programas, el Programa Atún-Picudo y el Programa
Atún-Delfín. Las responsabilidades principales del
primero son (1) estudiar la biología de los atunes y
especies afines en el Océano Pacífico oriental a fin
de determinar los efectos de la pesca y los factores
naturales sobre su abundancia, (2) recomendar
medidas apropiadas de conservación para permitir
mantener los stocks de peces a niveles que brinden
las capturas máximas sostenibles, (3) reunir información sobre el cumplimiento de las resoluciones de
la Comisión. Las responsabilidades principales del
segundo son (1) dar seguimiento a la abundancia de
los delfines y la mortalidad de los mismos incidental
a la pesca con red de cerco en el Océano Pacífico oriental, (2) estudiar las causas de la mortalidad de
delfines durante las operaciones de pesca y fomentar el uso de técnicas y aparejo de pesca que reduzcan dicha mortalidad al mínimo, (3) estudiar los
efectos de distintas mortalidades de pesca sobre los
varios peces y otros animales del ecosistema pelágico, (4) proporcionar la Secretaría para el Programa
Internacional para la Conservación de los Delfines.
La pronta publicación y amplia distribución de
los resultados de investigación forman un aspecto
importante de las labores de la Comisión, la cual
publica los resultados en su serie de Boletines,
Informes Especiales, e Informes de Datos, los cuales
son emítidas en forma irregular, y sus Informes de
Evaluación de Stocks, que son publicados anualmente.
La Comisión publica también Informes Anuales
e Informes Trimestrales; éstos incluyen información sobre las labores de la Comisión, la pesquería,
y las investigaciones realizadas en el año o
trimestre correspondiente. Los Informes Anuales
incluyen también un resumen financiero y una lista
del personal de la CIAT.
Información adicional de las publicaciones de la
CIAT puede ser encontrado en su sitio de internet.

Editor—Redactor
William H. Bayliff
Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission
Comisión Interamericana del Atún Tropical
8604 La Jolla Shores Drive
La Jolla, California 92037-1508, U.S.A.
www.iattc.org

