2020 Fisheries Centre Research Reports 28(2) 
 
32 
 
Figure 3. The effect of threefold increase in the fishing effort on the biomass of A: baleen whales; B: toothed whales; C: 
sperm whales; and D: pinnipeds. The results are based on the Ecosim simulation of the NE Okhotsk Sea model over the ten-
year time period.  
 
 
Figure 3 shows that threefold increase in the fishing effort caused a decrease in the biomass of baleen whales and 
pinnipeds. It also caused a slight increase in the biomasses of toothed and sperm whales. 
 
Discussion 
The purpose of this research was to create an Ecopath model of the Okhotsk Sea for the 1980s and to compare it 
with an already existing food web of the same region and period (Shuntov and Dulepova 1997). 
 
Both flow pyramids (Figure 1) and transfer efficiency statistics (Table 5) indicate that the transfer efficiencies are 
higher in the NE model (21.9%) compared to the SD model (6.2%). One of the possible explanations for this is 
that there is a smaller number of functional groups and therefore greater number of species within a single 
functional group in the SD model. Because of this, the amount of trophic interactions in the system is greatly 
reduced. Even though an Ecopath model may accurately represent the flow of the biomass between the 
components of the system, it hides the multiple levels of prey-predator interactions that occur within a single 
functional group and clumps it under cannibalism. This may lead to an underestimation of the numbers of 
trophic levels in the system.  
 
Since the NE model contains more functional groups than the SD model, it is capable of showing a more complex 
system of trophic interactions, resulting in a greater amount of trophic levels and greater transfer efficiency 
between the levels, compared to the older model.  
 
It is interesting to note that biomass of zooplankton, non-predatory zoobenthos, and predatory zoobenthos as 
well as the P/B ratios of these functional groups are very similar in both models. One of the most visible 
differences between the two models, however, is that biomass of phytoplankton in NE model greatly exceeds that 
of a SD model. This difference could have resulted from the assumption that all bacterioplankton and 
