Marine and Freshwater Miscellanea II 
 
25 
Pomeroy (1974) argue that they form a “microbial loop” that recycles dead organic matter (DOM) and releases 
nutrients that can be used by primary producers. However, bacteria and protozoa operate largely outside of the 
food web that leads to fishes and marine mammals. Thus, they are not included in NE model of the Okhotsk Sea 
and many other Ecopath models (Trites et al. 1999; Pauly and Christensen 1996; Aydin et al. 2002). In order to 
compare the SD model to NE model, the bacteria and microzooplankton links were taken out of the food chain 
and represented as part of the detritus group.  
 
NE model included twenty-nine functional groups. Species were assigned to functional groups based on the 
similarities in the diet, production and consumption characteristics, and importance in the ecosystem  
 
The biomass, production, and consumption parameters of most species change with the season. Average annual 
parameters were calculated based on mean of summer, spring, fall, and winter parameters, weighted to the 
number of months that made up each season.  
 
The Ecopath modeling is an approach to the food web analysis that was first emerged in the works of Polovina 
(1984). Which was further developed by Christensen and Pauly (1992a), and made available in form of software 
program (Christensen and Pauly 1992b). Currently, Ecopath is widely employed by more than 2700 users in 126 
countries. The last up-to-date version of this program, as well user manuals and other publications can be found 
on the Ecopath website. 
 
The Ecopath approach is based on the assumption that in any ecosystem the production of a functional group is 
equal to the sum of biomass accumulation, total catch, loss due to predation, other mortality, and loss of biomass 
to the other systems. Ecopath also assumes that consumption of a group A biomass by group B is equal to a sum 
of production, respiration and unassimilated food of group A. Thus, the Ecopath mass-balance model relies on 
the master equation: 
Bi ∙ (P/B)i ∙ EEi = Yi + Σ [Bj ∙ (Q/B)j ∙ DCji] + BAi + NMi 
where 
• 
Bi is biomass of functional group i; Bj is biomass of functional group j; 
• 
P/Bi is the ratio of production/biomass, which is equivalent to mortality in most cases (Allen 1971);  
• 
EE is ecotrophic efficiency or a fraction of production utilized by other components of the system. 
Ecotrophic efficiency must be below 1, otherwise it would mean that certain component of the system is 
being consumed at a greater rate than it is produced. In this way EE serves as a primary method of 
Ecopath model calibration; 
• 
Q/Bj is the ratio of consumption per unit of biomass; 
• 
Yi is equal to the fisheries catch per unit area; 
• 
DCij is a proportion of i in the diet of j; 
• 
BAi is the accumulation of the biomass; and 
• 
NMi is net migration, or emigration minus immigration. 
 
The construction of Ecopath model of Okhotsk Sea consists of the following steps: 
1. 
Defining the ecosystem;  
2. Defining the functional groups in the system. Living organisms in one functional group must possess 
similar consumption, production and diet matrix values; 
3. Gathering the information regarding biomass, production, consumption, and unassimilated 
consumption parameters for every functional group. Data was collected from various published and 
unpublished sources in Russian and English; 
4. Gathering information about the diet matrix of functional groups;  
5. Gathering information about fisheries in the region of the Okhotsk Sea; 
