Marine and Freshwater Miscellanea II 
 
23 
A MODEL OF THE OKHOTSK SEA WITH A FOCUS ON MARINE MAMMALS† 
 
Natalia Chaikina 
 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada 
 
Abstract 
This contribution summarizes previous research performed on the biomass, production and other parameters of 
different species in the Okhotsk Sea ecosystem for the 1980s period into an Ecopath model. The model was then 
compared to a previously published food web diagram for the same region and period based on biomass, energy 
flow, and numbers of trophic levels. The applications of the model in the research of the effects of fisheries on 
marine mammals were also investigated. It was found that the biomass distribution in the model was similar to 
that in the previously published food web. However, the estimated transfer efficiency and number of trophic 
levels in the model were greater that of the earlier food web. The new model of the Okhotsk Sea indicated that a 
large amount of energy flow in the system originates from detritus. Ecosim time simulations showed that an 
increase in the fishing effort did not cause a uniform a decrease in the biomass of marine mammals. 
 
Introduction 
The impacts of fishing activities on the ocean systems all over the world have been receiving increased attention 
(National Marine Fisheries Service, 1999). Pauly et al. (1998) suggested that overfishing tends to decrease mean 
trophic level of major species groups in the ecosystem, i.e. generate a gradual change in the overall catch 
composition, which shifts from large benthic fish with higher trophic levels to smaller pelagic fish with lower 
trophic levels. Research focused on fisheries impacts on the ecosystem could therefore aid in improvement of 
managing policies.  This, in turn, could help to reduce deleterious impacts of overfishing and protect endangered 
species. 
 
Unfortunately, most of the research conducted in the past focused mainly on the changes occurring to single 
species. This single-species approach ignores the complex web of prey-predator interactions that take place in any 
marine ecosystem and can have a significant effect on the population of study animals. 
 
Recently many researchers have begun to utilize ecosystem-based approach (NMFS, 1999). This broadening 
concept allows researchers to assess not only direct impact of fisheries on the health of target species, but also to 
investigate their effects on the entire ecosystem. Fisheries can induce changes to the trophic balance and food web 
relationships. It is possible to estimate the full impact of human disturbance on certain species only in the context 
of the entire system. Study species can be directly affected by a disturbance itself as well as through the changes in 
the abundance of their prey, competitors and predators. For example, even though direct competition between 
marine mammals and fishing operations due to prey overlap is relatively small, it was suggested that the amount 
of primary production in the region necessary to sustain populations of marine mammals significantly declines 
with increases in fishing activities (Trites et al., 1997).  
 
Due to its high productivity, the Okhotsk Sea has been an area of interest to researchers. Several attempts to 
summarize the energy and biomass flow in the entire Okhotsk Sea have been undertaken by Russian scientists, 
resulting in multiple flow diagrams (Shuntov and Dulepova, 1997; Sorokin et al., 1997; Sorokin and Sorokin, 1999; 
 
† Cite as: Chaikina, N. 2020. A Model of the Okhotsk Sea with a focus on marine mammals. pp. 23-34. In Pauly D. and V. 
Ruiz-Leotaud (eds.) Marine and Freshwater Miscellanea II. Fisheries Centre Research Reports 28(2). Institute for the 
Oceans and Fisheries, University of British Columbia. 
Based on Chaikina, N.  2004. A trophic mass-balance model of the Sea of Okhotsk for the 1980s period. BSc. thesis, Faculty of 
Science, University of British Columbia, 49 p. 
