PDFPAGE 1
XIPHIIDAE
Swordfishes
by I. Nakamura
A single species in this family.
Xiphias gladius Linnaeus, 1758
SWO
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: Xiphias estara Whitley, 1964 / None.
FAO names: En - Swordfish; Fr - Espadon; Sp - Pez espada.
Diagnostic characters: Body elongate and cylindrical. Eye large. Upper jaw prolonged into a long bill,
flat oval in cross-section (upper jaw much longer than lower jaw in adults, but both jaws nearly equally
prolonged into long bills in immature individuals). Mouth large, not protrusible. Fine file-like teeth in
individuals to about 1.3 m total length, disappearing with growth. Gill openings wide, left and right gill
membranes only anteriorly slightly united, free from isthmus. No gill rakers on gill arches. Two widely
separate dorsal fins in adults, the first with 38 to 45 soft rays and the second with 4 or 5 soft rays, the
former much larger than the latter (dorsal fins continuous in immature specimens). Two separate anal fins
in adults, the first with 12 to 16 soft rays much larger than the second with 3 or 4 soft rays (anal fins continuous
in immature specimens). Caudal fin very large, forked and lunate. A large median keel present on each
side of caudal peduncle. A large and deep notch on both upper and lower profiles of caudal peduncle.
Pectoral fins with 17 to 19 rays, falcate, a little rigid and situated low in position on body. Pelvic fins absent.
Scales with small spines present in specimens to about 1.3 m total length, disappearing with growth. Lateral
line indistinct, but recognizable in specimens up to about 1.3 m total length as a wavy-shaped line,
disappearing with growth. Vertebrae 26 (15+11 or 16+10). Colour: dorsal and lateral side of body blackish
brown, gradually fading to light brown on ventral side; fin membrane of first dorsal fin dark brown; other fins
brown or dark brown.
Similar families occurring in the area
Istiophoridae: upper jaw prolonged as in the swordfish,
but shaped as a spear rather than a sword, its cross-
section being round (flat-oval in Xiphias), pelvic fins
present, 2 keels on either side of caudal-fin base (1
strong keel in Xiphias), a shallow notch on both upper
and lower profiles of caudal peduncle (deep notch in
Xiphias); vertebrae 24 (26 in Xiphias).
Alepisauridae: somewhat similar to swordfishes in
general appearance, but easily distinguished by their
jelly-like body, absence of prolonged jaws, no keels at
base of caudal fin and no scales on body, presence of
fang-like teeth and an adipose fin (instead of rayed
second dorsal fin), and presence of pelvic fins.
Istiophoridae
Alepisauridae
Perciformes: Scombroidei: Xiphiidae
3757
click for previous page

PDFPAGE 2
Belonidae: both jaws prolonged, dorsal and anal fins
both single and similar in size and shape, pectoral fins
not falcate except Ablennes, and pelvic fins present.
Size: Maximum total length about 4.5 m, commonly to
3 m. Maximum body weight about 540 kg.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: An epi- and mesopelagic, oceanic species, usually found in surface waters
warmer than 13°C, the optimum temperature ranging from 18° to 22°C in the northwestern Pacific. Swordfish
has the greatest temperature tolerance among billfishes, ranging from 5° to 27°C. Based on records of forage
organisms taken by swordfish, its depth distribution in the northwestern Pacific ranges normally from the
surface to a depth of about 550 m. Larvae are more frequently encountered at temperatures above 24°C.
Adults are opportunistic feeders, known to forage for their food from the surface to the bottom over a wide
depth range. They feed on pelagic squids where abundant. Based on stomach contents from swordfishes,
it is most likely that they use their sword to kill some of the prey, particularly squids, as shown by the slashes
on the bodies of prey found in their stomachs. Swordfish are caught by longline, harpoon, drift gill net, set
net, and other fishing gear in
commercial fisheries, and by
trolling in sports fishing. From
1990 to 1995, the FAO Year-
book of Fishery Statistics re-
ports a range of yearly catch of
around 3 730 to 5 690 t of
Xiphias gladius from
the
Western Central Pacific.
Distribution: Cosmopolitan in
tropical, temperate and some-
times cold waters of all
oceans.
Reference
Nakamura, I. 1985. FAO species catalogue. Vol. 5. Billfishes of the world. An annotated and illustrated catalogue of
marlins, sailfishes, spearfishes and swordfishes known to date. FAO Fish. Synop., (125)5:65 p.
Belonidae
3758
Bony Fishes

PDFPAGE 3
ISTIOPHORIDAE
Billfishes
by I. Nakamura
D
iagnostic characters: Body elongate and moderately compressed (size to 5 m). Upper jaw pro-
longed into a long spear, round in cross-section, much longer than lower jaw. Mouth not
protrusible, with fine, rasp-like teeth on both jaws. Gill openings wide, right and left branchiostegal
membranes completely united and free from isthmus. No gill rakers on gill arches, gill filaments reticulated.
Two dorsal fins, close together, the first much larger than the second. Two anal fins, the second much
smaller than the first and similar in size and shape to second dorsal fin. Both first dorsal and anal fins
can be folded back into grooves. Caudal fin large and forked, with a pair of keels on either side at
base, a small shallow notch on both upper and lower profiles of caudal peduncle. Pectoral fins falcate.
Pelvic fins present, with I spine and 2 soft rays. Lateral line always well visible (except in large
individuals of Makaira mazara and M. indica). Body covered with more or less imbedded, narrow, and
pointed scales. Vertebrae 24 (12+12 or 11+13). Colour: back and upper sides blue (sometimes darker),
lower sides and belly silvery white. In some species there are horizontally aligned spots or longitudinal
lines on body and/or black spot on the first dorsal fin membrane.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Billfishes are primarily inhabitants of warm seas, usually the upper layers
of water above the thermocline, but during the summer months they follow schools of smaller fishes into
temperate, sometimes cold waters. Being among the largest and swiftest fishes of the oceans, they perform
long distance migrations. All billfishes are of some commercial value throughout the world (high commercial
value in Japanese markets) and provide excellent food. Most of the species are exploited commercially by
longline fleets, harpoons, set nets, and drift gill nets; all are regarded as excellent game fishes by sports
fishermen. For 1995, the FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics reports a total catch of 13 176 t of Istiophoridae
from the Western Central Pacific.
Similar families occurring in the area
Xiphiidae: upper jaw prolonged as in istiophorids, but
shaped as a sword rather than a spear, its cross-sec-
tion being flat-oval (round in Istiophoridae), pelvic fins
absent, a single strong keel on either side of caudal-fin
base (2 keels in Istiophoridae), a deep notch on both
upper and lower profiles of caudal peduncle (shallow
notch in Istiophoridae), vertebrae 26 (24 in Istiophori-
dae), adults are further characterized by 2 well-sepa-
rated dorsal fins, absence of teeth in jaws and of scales
on body, and by the fact that lateral line is not visible
externally.
cross-section
flat-oval
notch
notch
a single keel
no pelvic fins
Xiphiidae
upper jaw
prolonged
cross-section
round

lateral line
1st dorsal fin
2nd dorsal fin
caudal keels
2nd anal fin
1st anal fin
pelvic fin
Perciformes: Scombroidei: Istiophoridae
3759

PDFPAGE 4
Alepisauridae: somewhat similar to sailfish (genus Is-
tiophorus) in general appearance, but easily distin-
guished by their jelly-like body, absence of prolonged
jaws, no keels at base of caudal fin and no scales on
body, presence of fang-like teeth, an adipose fin (in-
stead of rayed second dorsal fin), and insertion of
pelvic fins far behind pectoral fins.
Belonidae: large representatives may be somewhat
similar to small spearfishes (genus Tetrapturus) with
first dorsal fin folded into a groove, but they have both
jaws prolonged, dorsal and anal fins both single and
similar in size and shape, pectoral fins not falcate
except Ablennes, and pelvic fins inserted far behind
pectoral fins.
Key to the species of Istiophoridae occurring in the area
1a.
First dorsal fin sail-like, much higher
than maximum body depth; pelvic-
fin rays very long, almost reaching
to anus (Fig. 1) . . . . . . Istiophorus platypterus
1b. First dorsal fin not sail-like, only
slightly higher to lower than maxi-
mum body depth; pelvic-fin rays not
as long, far from reaching to anus
(Figs 2 to 5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  2
2a.
Anterior part of first dorsal fin slightly higher than, or nearly equal to body depth; profile
of head between preorbital region and origin of first dorsal fin nearly flat (Fig. 2) to slightly
elevated (Fig. 3); body compressed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Tetrapturus)  3
2b. Anterior part of first dorsal fin lower than body depth; profile of head between preorbital
region and origin of first dorsal fin steeply elevated (Figs 4 and 5); body not compressed
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (Makaira)  4
3a.
Bill short, less than 15% of body length (Fig. 2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Tetrapturus angustirostris
3b. Bill moderately long, more than 18% of body length (Fig. 3) . . . . . . . . . . . . Tetrapturus audax
fang-like
teeth
pelvic fin
adipose
fin
Alepisauridae
both jaws elongate
pelvic fin
Belonidae
Fig. 1 Istiophorus platypterus
Fig. 2 Tetrapturus angustirostris
Fig. 3 Tetrapturus audax
3760
Bony Fishes

PDFPAGE 5
4a.
Pectoral fins rigid, not able to be folded back against sides of body; lateral line single
(Fig. 4) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Makaira indica
4b. Pectoral fins not rigid, able to be folded back against sides of body; lateral line looped
(Fig. 5)
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Makaira mazara
List of species occurring in the area
The symbol is given when species accounts are included.
 Istiophorus platypterus (Shaw and Nodder, 1792)
 Makaira indica (Cuvier, 1832)
 Makaira mazara (Jordan and Snyder, 1901)
 Tetrapturus angustirostris Tanaka, 1915
 Tetrapturus audax (Philippi, 1887)
Reference
Nakamura, I. 1985. FAO species catalogue. Vol. 5. Billfishes of the world. An annotated and illustrated catalogue of
marlins, sailfishes, spearfishes and swordfishes known to date. FAO Fish. Synop., (125)5:65 p.
Fig. 4 Makaira indica
Fig. 5 Makaira mazara
Perciformes: Scombroidei: Istiophoridae
3761

PDFPAGE 6
Makaira mazara (Jordan and Snyder, 1901)
BIZ
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / Makaira nigricans Lacepède, 1802.
FAO names: En - Indo-Pacific blue marlin; Fr - Makaire bleu de l’Indo-Pacifique; Sp - Aguja azul del
Indo-Pacifico.
Diagnostic characters: Body elongate-fusiform and not strongly compressed. Bill long, extremely stout,
and round in cross-section. Nape conspicuously elevated. Two dorsal fins, first with 40 to 45 rays, lower
than body depth throughout its length, with a pointed anterior lobe and a long base, second dorsal fin with
6 or 7 soft rays, its position slightly backward with respect to that of second anal fin. Two anal fins,
first with 12 to 17 rays and second with 6 or 7 soft rays. Caudal fin larger and stongly forked, 2 keels on each
side of caudal peduncle and a shallow notch on both dorsal and ventral surfaces. Pectoral fins depressible
to sides of body, with 20 to 23 rays. Pelvic fins shorter than pectoral fins, with I spine and 2 soft rays. Lateral
line looped. Body covered with densely imbedded scales, each with 1 or 2 long acute spines. Vertebrae
24 (11+13). Colour: body blue dorsally, silvery white ventrally, first dorsal fin membrane blue black,
unspotted, other fins dark brown, about 15 obscure vertical bars on body.
Size: Maximum total length about 5 m, body weight to about 900 kg.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Epipelagic and oceanic species mostly confined to waters on warmer side
of 24°C surface isotherm and known to effect seasonal north-south migrations. Indo-Pacific blue marlins are
not usually seen close to land masses or islands, unless there is a deep drop-off of shelf (900 to 1 800 m
as in waters off Kailua-Kona, Hawaii). Stomachs contained mostly squids (around the Philippines) and
tuna-like fishes (off New Zealand and in the Central Pacific). In Hawaiian waters, tuna-like fishes make up
more than 85% in volume of diet of this species. From 1990 to 1995, the FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics
reports a range of yearly catch of 4 085 to 9 662 t of this species from the area.
Distribution:
Throughout
tropical, subtropical, and
sometimes temperate waters
of the Indo-Pacific. The most
tropical among billfishes,
chiefly distributed in equatorial
areas.
3762
Bony Fishes

PDFPAGE 7
Tetrapturus audax (Philippi, 1887)
MLS
Frequent synonyms / misidentifications: None / None.
FAO names: En - Striped marlin; Fr - Marlin raye; Sp - Marlin rayad.
Diagnostic characters: Body elongate-fusiform and fairly compressed. Bill long, stout, and round in
cross-section. Nape fairly elevated. Two dorsal fins, first dorsal fin low posteriorly, with 37 to 42 rays, height
of anterior part of first dorsal fin higher than body depth, second dorsal fin small, with 5 or 6 soft rays.
Two anal fins, first with 13 to 18 rays and second with 5 or 6 soft rays. Pectoral fins depressible to side of
body, with 21 to 23 rays. Pelvic fins shorter than pectoral fins in larger specimens, slightly longer than pectoral
fins in smaller specimens with I spine and 2 soft rays. Lateral line single. Body covered with densely
imbedded scales, each with 1 or sometimes 2 acute spines. Vertebrae 24 (12+12). Colour: body dark blue
dorsally, silvery white ventrally, first dorsal fin membrane blue black, other fins dark brown, about 20
conspicuous vertical bars on body.
Size: Maximum total length about 3.5 m, body weight to about 200 kg.
Habitat, biology, and fisheries: Epipelagic and oceanic species, usually swimming above thermocline.
This species is the most and widely distributed of all billfishes, especially in the eastern and northern Central
Pacific, where it is much more abundant than in the western Pacific. In the Indian Ocean, it is abundant in
the western Arabian Sea. Tetrapturus audax, like other billfishes and tunas, is carnivorous and a non-se-
lective feeder. From 1990 to 1995, the FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics reports a range of yearly catch
of 663 to 2 004 t of T. audax from the Western Central Pacific.
Distribution: Throughout tropi-
cal, subtropical, and sometimes
temperate waters of the Indian
and Pacific oceans. Latitudinal
limits are about 45°N to 35° to
40°S in the Pacific Ocean, and
35°S in the southeastern Indian
Ocean.
Perciformes: Scombroidei: Istiophoridae
3763

PDFPAGE 8
Istiophorus platypterus (Shaw and Nodder 1792)
SFA
En - Indo-Pacific sailfish; Fr - Voilier de l’Indo-Pacifique; Sp - Pez vela del Indo-Pacifico.
Maximum total length about 3.5 m, maximum body weight about 100 kg. Oceanic, epipelagic, and
highly migratory, usually above thermocline. Most densely distributed in waters close to coasts and
islands. Feeds on a wide variety of fishes, crustaceans, and cephalopods. Caught mainly with
longlines, set nets, and sometimes by trolling and harpooning from boats. From 1990 to 1995, the
FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics reports a range of yearly catch of 356 to 629 t of Istiophorus
platypterus from the area. Throughout tropical, subtropical, and sometimes temperate waters of the
Indo-Pacific.
Makaira indica (Cuvier, 1832)
BLM
En - Black marlin; Fr - Makaire noir; Sp - Aguja negra.
Maximum total length about 4.5 m, maximum body weight about 700 kg. Oceanic, highly migratory,
and epipelagic, usually above thermocline. Most densely distributed in waters close to coasts and
islands. Feeds on a wide variety of fishes, crustaceans, and cephalopods, but mostly on small tunas
in waters where small tunas are abundant. Caught mainly by commercial longliners, trolling of
sportsfishing, harpooning and sometimes by set nets and gill nets. From 1990 to 1995, the FAO
Yearbook of Fishery Statistics reports a range of yearly catch of 334 to 1 656 t of Makaira indica
from the area. Throughout tropical and subtropical (sometimes temperate) waters of the Indo-Pa-
cific.
Tetrapturus angustirostris Tanaka, 1915
En - Shortbill spearfish; Fr - Makaira à rostre court; Sp - Marlin trompa corta.
Maximum total length about 2 m, maximum body weight about 52 kg. Highly oceanic, migratory,
and epipelagic, usually above thermocline. Seldom approaching shore. Feeds on a wide variety of
fishes, crustaceans, and cephalopods. Caught as bycatch of commercial longlines. Throughout
tropical and subtropical (sometimes temperate) waters of the Indian and Pacific oceans.
3764
Bony Fishes
click for next page
