PDFPAGE 1
1. 
INTRODUCTION
This review covers the 12 species of billfishes recognized to date, even though the taxonomic status of one
of them (Tetrapturus georgei) is still somewhat uncertain. 
A thirteenth form, the so-called “Hatchet marlin”,
often mentioned in recent literature, is also briefly presented (see page 5), but cannot be recognized as a valid
species on the basis of the presently available data.
The systematic part of the present catalogue is based primarily on Nakamura, Iwai and Matsubara (1968),
Nakamura (1974) and Nakamura (1983), while the remaining information, particularly that on biology and fisheries
of the various species, stems from the author’s personal experience and pertinent literature available to him. 
In
order to avoid overcharging the text with literature citations, every effort was made to restrict these to papers
considered to be of specific relevance to the biology and fisheries of the species in question. Many other
important papers, particularly on systematics, anatomy, distribution and the more general aspects of biology and
fisheries, although omitted in the text, have been included in the bibliography. 
Although great care was paid in
evaluating the published and unpublished information used in this review,
some misjudgements and incorrect
interpretations will undoubtedly have occurred.
For more detailed information on billfish taxonomy, stocks, biology and fisheries, the reader is referred to
specialized periodical publications such as the Bulletin of the Far Seas Fisheries Research Laboratory (Shimizu,
Japan), the Fishery Bulletin of NMFS, NOAA, US Department of Commerce (Seattle, USA), and the more
comprehensive papers on billfish taxonomy and biology, such as the Proceedings of the International Billfish
Symposium, Kailua-Kona, Hawaii, 9 to 12 August 1972, edited by R.S. Shomura and F. Williams (NOAA Technical
Report NMFS SSRF-675), “The sailfish, the swashbuckler of the open sea”, by J.B. Tinsley (1964), “Billfish, marlin,
broadbill, sailfish”, by C.O. Mather (1976) and “Systematics of the Billfishes (Xiphiidae and Istiophoridae)” by
I. Nakamura (1983).
Acknowledgements
The author wishes to convey his deepest appreciation and thanks to Dr Walter Fischer (FAO, Rome) for his
initiative, guidance, encouragement and enthusiastic support; to Dr Shiro Chikuni (FAO, Rome) for his critical
revision of the fisheries information included in this catalogue; 
to Mr Paolo Lastrico for his neat work in
redrawing the rough sketches presented with the draft manuscript; to Mrs Michèle Kautenberger-Longo (FAO,
Rome) for typing of the final manuscript and to Ms Gloria Soave (FAO, Rome) for the revision of the bibliography.
The author also wishes to express his deep gratitude to:
Mr Sho Okano of the Fishermen’s Cooperative of Kyoto Prefecture who granted him permission to examine
billfishes landed at the Nishi-Maizuru Fish Market; to Captain Yoshio Kurohiji and the crew of the R/V SHUNYO
MARU and to Captain Sadamu Tanabe and the crew of the R/V SHOYO MARU for their valuable help during his
participation in several longline fisheries research cruises in the Pacific, Indian and Atlantic oceans.
The fishermen and fisheries technicians who have helped the author in the course of his billfish studies and
have given him invaluable information
on fisheries, behaviour and biology of these fishes, in particular
Mr Guillermo M. Adachi (Manzanillo Game Fishing Club, Mexico); Mr Peter Goadby (Game Fishing Association of
Australia); Messrs Jack Izatt, John Covacevich, David Hopton, Peter Nielsen and Joe Bethune and Ms Daphnie
Nielson (Cairns Game Fishing Club, Australia); Messrs Toshiro Sato, Wataru Ichikawa, Shoji Nakano and Michio
Kuroiwa (Japan Marine Fisheries Resources Research Center); Mr Elwood K. Harry (President of the International
Game Fish Association); Messrs Shojiro Shimura and Soroku Togo (Fisheries Agency, Government of Japan);
Messrs Seki Araki, Ryoichi Shugyo and Tsuneo Okabe (Nishidomari Fishermen’s Cooperative, Tsushima, Japan).
The scientists and research institutions who have provided useful information, or accommodation to the
author and offered him their facilities during his visits, in particular: the late Dr Hiroshi Nakamura, Dr Shooji
Ueyanagi, Dr Shoji Kikawa, the late Mr Hisaya Watanabe, Dr Keiichiro Mori, Dr Hajime Yamanaka, Mr Yasuo
Nishikawa, Dr Toshio Shiohama and Mr Ikuo Warashina (formerly Nankai Regional Fisheries Research Laboratory,
Kochi now Far Seas Fisheries Research Laboratory, Shimizu, Japan); the late Prof. Kiyomatsu Matsubara and
Prof. Tamotsu Iwai (Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan); Dr Jiro Isa and Mr Akio Tomori (Okinawa Prefectural
Fisheries Experimental Laboratory, Okinawa, Japan); Dr John R. Paxton and Dr Frank Talbot (Australian Museum,
Sydney, Australia); Dr Julian G. Pepperell, Mr John Matthews and Mr Robert Williams (New South Wales State
Fisheries, Sydney, Australia); Dr Robert H. Gibbs, Jr. (US National Museum of Natural History Washington, D.C.,
USA); Dr Bruce B. Collette and Dr Daniel Cohen (Systematics Laboratory, NMFS, NOAA, Washington, D.C., USA);
Dr W. Eschmeyer and Dr T. Iwamoto (California Academy of Sciences, San Francisco, USA); Dr Robert J.
Lavenberg (Los Angeles County Museum, Los Angeles, USA); the late Prof. Carl L. Hubbs and Prof. Richard H.
Rosenblatt (Scripps Institution of Oceanography, La Jolla, USA); Mr Withold L. Klawe (Inter-American Tropical
Tuna Commission, La Jolla, USA); Prof. C. Richard Robins and Prof. Donald P. de Sylva (University of Miami,
Miami, USA); Dr Francis G. Carey (Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, Woods Hole, USA); Dr William Smith-
Vaniz and the late Dr John Böhlke (Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, USA); Dr Donn E.
Rosen and Dr C.L. Smith (American Museum of Natural History, New York, USA); Dr Peter J.P. Whitehead, Mr
Alwyn Wheeler and Mr Oliver Crimmen (British Museum, Natural History, London, UK); Dr Marie-Louise Bauchot
and Ms M. Desoutter (Museum National d’Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France); Dr Alfred Post (Institut für
Seefischerei, Hamburg, Germany, Fed. Rep.); Dr Jørgen Nielsen (Universitetets Zoologiske Museum, Copenhagen,
Denmark); Dr E.G. Silas (Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, Cochin, India); the late Dr H.T. Teng
(Taiwan Fisheries Research Institute, Keelung, China); Dr Thosaporn Wongratana (Department of Biology,
Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand).
Finally, the author wishes to heartily acknowledge the technical assistance provided by Mrs Reiko
Nakamura.
- 1 -
click for previous page

PDFPAGE 2
1.1 Plan of the Catalogue
This catalogue is arranged alphabetically by genera and species.
Each of the multispecies genera is
introduced with general descriptive remarks, illustrations of diagnostic features,
relevance to fisheries.
highlights on the biology, and
(1)scientific name,
The information pertaining to each species is arranged by paragraphs, as follows:
(2)  synonymy,
(3) FAO  species names,
(4)  field marks,
(5) diagnostic features,
(6) geographical distribution, (7) habitat and biology, (8) size, (9) interest to fisheries, (10) local species
names, (11) literature, and (12) remarks.
(1((1)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Scientific name : : Reference is given to the original description of each species so no confusion will
arise as to precise identification.
Synonymy :    Synonims and different  name combinations are listed (misidentifications and other
FAO species names : 
FAO, were selected on the basis of the following criteria: (i)
 
: 
only, in a worldwide context;  (ii) the name
each name must apply to one species
should not lead to confusion with other groups. Wherever
possible, the names selected were based on vernacular names (or parts of names) already in existence
within the areas where the species is fished. 
local species names, but they are considered necessary to overcome the considerable confusion caused
by the use of a single name for many different species, or several names for the same species.
Field marks :
 
A few obvious field characters of use in field identification extracted from “Diagnostic
Features” at various levels.
Diagnostic features : 
Distinctive characters of the species are given as an aid for identification,
accompanied by pertinent illustrations. 
Species identifications should be attempted only after
consultation of the illustrated key to genera and species. 
Reference to  FAOFSpecies Identification
Sheets is given wherever relevant.
Geographical distribution : 
: 
The entire known geographic range of the species, including areas of
seasonal occurrence, is given in the text and shown on a small map. In cases where only scattered
records of occurrence are available, interrogation marks have been used to indicate areas of
suspected 
distribution.
Habitat and biology : 
:The known depth range of the species,and information on salinity and
temperature of its habitat are given where known. 
Information on biological aspects, such as
migrations, spawning seasons and areas, food, predators and longevity is also included.
Size : 
The maximum known, as well as the common body length and weight (if available) are given.
Body length is measured from the tip of the lower jaw to the tip of the caudal rays in the middle of
the fork of the tail. 
The all-tackle angling record and length at first maturity are given where
known.
Interest to fisheries :    
This paragraph gives an account of the areas where the species is fished and
of the nature of the fishery; 
its importance is either qualitatively estimated or actual figures of
annual landings are provided. 
Data on utilization (fresh, dried, frozen, canned, etc.) are also given
where available. 
Here too, the quality and quantity of the information available vary considerably
with the species.
Local species names :
 
These are the names used locally for the various species. 
The present
compilation is necessarily incomplete, since only a fraction of the local names used throughout the
world is actually published. 
In many cases, local names are available only for species supporting
documented fisheries. Apart from possible omissions due to limitations of literature available, some
of the names included may be somewhat artificial (i.e. through transliteration of indigenous words
into English). The local species name is preceeded by the name of the country concerned (in capital
letters) and, where necessary, by geographical specifications (in lower case). Whenever possible, the
language of the transcribed vernacular name is added in parenthesis. When more than one name is
used within a country, the official name, if available, is underlined.
Literature  : 
This includes references to the most important publications relevant to the species, the
emphasis being on biology and fisheries. Additional references are included in the bibliography. In
the case of a few uncommon species, only systematic papers are available.
Remarks  : 
Important information concerning the species and not fitting in any of the previous
paragraphs is given here. 
For instance, in some cases the scientific name used in the present
catalogue, although nomenclaturally correct, is not the best known. 
Other nomenclatural 
problems,
such as the use of subspecies, are discussed.
 FAO species names are, of course, not intended to
replace
nomenclatorial problems are discussed under (11) remarks).
    English, French and Spanish names for each species, to be used primarily within
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
- 2 -

PDFPAGE 3
1.2 General Remarks on Billfishes
The term “Billfishes” has been widely accepted by both, commercial and sports fishermen as well as
scientists, to apply to the large fishes of the families Xiphiidae and Istiophoridae, characterize d by the
prolongation of the upper jaw, much beyond the lower jaw
into a long rostrum which is flat and swordlike
(swordfish) or rounded and spearlike (sailfishes, spearfishes and marlins). Needlefishes, (Belonidae ) are also
sometimes referred to as billfishes, but they are easily distinguished from the true billfishes by having both jaws
prolonged, the dorsal and anal fins both single and similar in size and shape, and the pelvic fins inserted far behind
the pectorals.
The billfishes include 12 species arranged in four genera and two families as follows (see also Fig.1):
Phylum Chordata
Superclass 
Gnathostomata
Class Osteichthyes
Subclass Actinopterygii
Infraclass Teleostei
Division Euteleostei
Superorder 
Acanthopterygii
Order Perciformes
Suborder Xiphioidei
Family Xiphiidae
Xiphias gladius - Swordfish (worldwide)
Family Istiophoridae
Genus Istiophorus
- Atlantic sailfish (Atlantic)
- Indo-Pacific sailfish (Indian and Pacific oceans)
Genus Tetrapturus
- White marlin (Atlantic)
- Shortbill spearfish (Indian and Pacific oceans)
- Striped marlin (Indian and Pacific oceans)
- Mediterranean spearfish (Mediterranean Sea)
- Roundscale spearfish (Atlantic)
- Longbill spearfish (Atlantic)
Genus Makaira
Makaira indica - Black marlin (Indian and Pacific oceans)
Makaira mazara - Indo-Pacific blue marlin (Indian and Pacific oceans)
Makaira nigricans - Atlantic blue marlin (Atlantic)
Istiophorus albicans 
Istiophorus platypters 
Tetrapturus albidus 
Tetrapturus angustirostris 
Tetrapturus audax 
Tetrapturus pfluegeri 
Tetrapturus georgei 
Tetrapturus belone 
Genus Xiphias
- 3 - 

PDFPAGE 4
Classification 
of 
billfishes
Sizes of drawings correspond roughly to maximum lengths of species; screened oval areas show
cross-sections of bodies at level of pectoral fin bases (arrows show position of anus) anus)
Fig.1
- 4 -

PDFPAGE 5
Another billfish has recently been reported by
several authors (Robins, 1974; de Sylva, 1974;
McClane, 1974; Pristas, 1980) from the western
Atlantic Ocean, particularly in the Gulf of Mexico.
This might be either a new species or an aberrant
form of Tetrapturus albidus. Venezuelan and Cuban
fishermen have since long referred to this fish as
the “Hatchet marlin” or
“Axe marlin”. 
It 
is
characterized chiefly by the truncate shape of the
anterior lobes of the first dorsal and anal fins
(Fig.2) However,in the absence of conclusive
taxonomic evidence, a final decision on the status of
the Hatchet marlin cannot be made at this time and
further study on this problem is urgently needed.
Xiphias gladius (Family Xiphiidae) differs from all species of the Family Istiophoridae in both external and
internal features. 
Some superficial phenetic similarities, especially between Makaira and Xiphias seem to be
due to convergent evolution. 
As regards the relationship between the three istiophorid genera Tetrapturus,
Istiophorus and Makaira, various different opinions have been advanced. 
Generally, the sailfishes are included
in the genus Istiophorus, the small spearfishes in Tetrapturus and the large (blue and black) marlins in Makaira.
The smaller marlins striped and white), have been placed by many authors in either of the genera Tetrapturus
and Makaira. On the basis of the present author’s recent studies (Nakamura, 1983) it seems clear that these two
species, T. albidus and T. audax should be included in the genus Tetrapturus together with the small spearfishes,
belone
T. angustirostris, T. belone, T. pfulegeri and T. georgei (fig.1). (Fig.1).
It is likely that enlargement of the body as well as acquirement of the capability for fast swimming have
been an evolutionary trend in billfishes (see maximum body sizes of living billfishes in Fig.3).
Fig.3  Comparison of approximate maximum recorded body length and maximum recorded body weight (both are
not always coincidental with each other) in billfishes. 
The cross-sections of body and bill of each species
are shown schematically on left and right, respectively (modified after Nakamura, 1983, Fig.54)
“Hatchet marlin”
redrawn from McClane (1974)
Fig.2
- 5 - 

PDFPAGE 6
Furthermore, it has been shown that as billfishes grow larger, their bodies become much more robust,
particularly in the case of Makaira indica (see Fig.4).
Fig.4 Length-weight relationships of billfishes caught by setnets and landed at Nishi-Maizuru Fish Market, Kyoto
Pref., Japan between August 1976 and November 1978. 
Smaller I. platypterus (less than 110 cm body
length) were weighed whole, the other large fishes of all species were weighed without gills or guts, and
sometimes without the tip of the bill
O 
1OO
2OO 
3OO
BODY LENGTH cm.
- 6 -

PDFPAGE 7
angustirostris, M. mazara and M. nigricans are the most typically oceanic species. 
Roughly speaking, the
migration pattern of all billfishes involves seasonal movements into temperate or cold waters for feeding and
back to subtropical or tropical waters for overwintering and spawning. 
Although being among the largest and
fastest bony fishes known from the sea, they seldom perform transoceanic migrations as is typical for the large
tunas.
-
Billfishes are primarily oceanic, epipelagic species inhabiting tropical and temperate waters, and seasonally
also the cold waters of all oceans. 
They are usually confined to the water layers above the thermocline, but
some may occur at greater depths (to below 800 m).   The general distribution patterns of billfishes are
summarized in Fig.5. 
While Xiphias gladius is cosmopolitan, the istiophorids have more restricted distributions.
Although some billfish experts recognize only one cosmopolitan species of sailfish Istiophorus platypterus, the
present author prefers, for the time being, to retain the traditional distinction between I. platypterus for the
Indo-Pacific sailfish and I. albicans for the Atlantic sailfish, because there is evidence of some morphological
differences between these two forms (see pages 16, 21, 23 and 24). 
If we consider the presence of spawning
grounds to be a major element in the delimitation of principal areas of distribution, we may conclude that five of
the species of Istiophoridae are confined to the Pacific and Indian oceans, six (if we recognize Tetrapturus
georgei as valid) to the eastern atlantic and five (if we recognize the Hatchet marlin as valid) to the western
central Atlantic.  Furthermore, three species, Makaira indica, Tetrapturus angustirostris and Tetrapturus audax
have been shown to occur incidentally as "invaders" int the eastern Atlantic, which brings to 10 the number of
species found at least occasionally in the Atlantic Ocean.
Fig.5 
Schematic representation of the distribution of billfishes
W: Western; 
E: 
Eastern;
N: Northern Hemisphere; 
S: Southern Wemisphere;
Principal distribution areas (including spawning grounds);
@$$$$$ Areas of occasiona1 distribution, or invasion, (no 
(no spawning)
(modified after Nakamura, 1983, Fig.61)
   Istiophorus albicans, I. platypterus, and Makaira indica migrate seasonally towards coastal waters, while T.
 - 7 -

PDFPAGE 8
-
All species are dioecious (the sexes are separate) and their mating display is not completely known. None of
the species are known to show sexual dimorphism in morphological features or colour pattern, but females of
many species attain larger sizes than males.
subtropical waters.
Batch-spawning of most species takes place in tropical and
larvae.
The eggs are very small (about 1 mm in diameter) and pelagic, hatching out into planktonic
Billfishes are active and voracious predators, using their long rostrum for attacking their prey.  Most
likely there are no true, regular predators of billfishes, although they are preyed upon occasionally by many large
oceanic fishes, such as tunas, wahoo, skipjack and dolfinfishes, particularly during their younger stages. The
young are also taken sometimes by adult billfishes.
particularly high in Japanese markets. 
Most of them are exploited commercially by longliners and all are
regarded as excellent and exciting targets by sportsfishermen. The recent world production of billfishes fluctuates
around 95,000 metric tons per year (Table I) of which more than 90% is taken as bycatch in tuna longline
fisheries.
-
TABLE I
Estimated world catch of billfishes and tunas in metric tons (source : FAO, 1983, 1984)
Systematic Category 
1978 
1979 
1980 
1981 
1982
Istiophorus albicans
Istiophorus 
platypterus
Makaira indica
Makaira mazara
Makaira nigricans
Tetrapturus albidus
Tetrapturus audax
Istiophoridae n.e.i.*
267                 2 823           1 320                   1 091              920
10 516 
7 961 
7 767               6 438          7 214
2 909 
3 440 
2 465               2 453           2 373
18 193 
18 654         21 109                   21 413         20 727
1 842 
2 160 
2 328               2 218          2  448
204 
93                   119                         121                   131
15 426 
15 988 
18 429 
15 664 
15 460
5 920 
5 339 
6 062 
6 350 
7 320
 Subtotal Istiophoridae 
55 277 
56 483 
59 599 
55 748 
56 593
Subtotal Xiphiidae
40 279 
37 922 
36 402 
37 726 
40 321
40 279 
37 922 
36 402 
37 726 
40 321
Thunnus alalunga
Thunnus  albacares
albacares
Thunnus atlanticus
Thunnus maccoyii
222 775 
191 014 
182 084 
186 125 
183 481
521 466 
537 987 
522 412 
560 274 
535 725
78 
105 
300 
845 
807
32 415 
35 475 
39 186 
37 226 
29 005
210 358 
195 635 
201 021 
175 047 
182 940
35 601 
35 485 
32 479 
44 478 
41 365
34 
48 
9 
368 
4 020
Total Thunnus
                     1 022 727 
995 749 
977 491 
1 004 363 
977 343
*n.e.i.= not elsewhere identified
predominating in the catches are Xiphias glaudius, Makaira mazara, and Tetrapturus audax, accounting for about
40%, 23% and 17%, respectively, of the toal world catch.
This bycatch represents in weight about 10% of the actual tuna catches (genus Thunnus). Japan
produced about 70% of the world's catch and is the principal consumer country for these fishes. The species
Thunnus thynnus
Thunnus tonggol
Thunnus obesus
Xiphias gladius
Ratio: Xiphioidei/Thunnus 
0.093 
0.095 
0.098 
0.093 
0.097
Being excellent foodfish, all species are of some importance to fisheries.  Their commerical value is
1 Total Billfishes (Xiphioidei) 
95 556 
 94 405 
96 001            93 474         96 914
-- 8 -

PDFPAGE 9
- 9 -
commercial 
k Surface longline fishertes
.............
.............
iiHarpoon fishing grounds 
------ Approximate natural distribution of billfishes based on literature and personal communications from fishermen
Fig.6 
Schematic illustration of the world’s commercial and sport fisheries for billfishes
(modified after Nakamura, 1983, fig.62)
Virtually all billfishes are highly appreciated for the excellent quality of their flesh. 
Fish over 20 kg are
generally used for “sashimi” (sliced raw flesh with soy sauce and green mustard) and materials for “sushi” (sliced
raw flesh with green mustard on vinegar-boiled rice balls). 
The colour of billfish flesh is usually paler than that
of tuna. 
One of its advantages is that it does not change colour as easily as tuna flesh, thus withstanding longer
periods of transportation and having a longer market shelf-life than tuna meat.
Principal sportfishing grounds
Billfishes are caught with a variety of fishing methods, such as longlining, trolling, harpooning, drift-netting,
set-netting and others. 
The most important fishing method used in commercial fisheries is surface-longlining
which was gradually developed by Japanese, Chinese (fishermen from Taiwan Province) and Korean fleets
originally operating in the northwestern Pacific and then extending to other Pacific areas and to the Indian and
Atlantic oceans. 
This method is also extensively used by other fishing nations, particularly the USSR and Cuba.
On the other hand, sportsfishing is exclusively effected by trolling. 
Figure 6 represents the general distribution
of commercial and sportsfishing areas for billfishes. 
The commercial longline fisheries cover nearly the entire
natural distribution areas of the species, while all other fisheries are more restricted. 
The areas where
longline fisheries overlap with sportsfishing have recently been subjected to conflicts of interests in
relation to the extension of Exclusive Economic Zones, and hence, fishing rights, to 200 miles offshore.
click for next page
