S. Guénette, 2013 Bay of Bengal model 9 
 
Bramaputra-Ganges river system. Region 3 has a larger shelf, but is less influenced from river discharge than region 
2.  
 
In each region, coastal fish and invertebrates, identified with the region number, are assumed to be relatively 
isolated from other regions. Some groups are assumed to occupy the whole study area (e.g. oceanic sharks and 
tuna-like) or straddle 2 regions or all three (e.g. hilsa, Indian mackerel, coastal sharks, coastal scombrids, jellyfish). 
The area used for each grouped is listed in Appendix A1.2. 
Catch, effort and CPUE 
Catch 
We used the catches provided by the UBC Sea Around Us Project (SAUP) structured by country, sectors 
(subsistence, artisanal, industrial, tuna), and taxa, combining landings statistics and estimates of unreported 
catches (Zeller et al. 2013). Catches labeled miscellaneous fish, Perciformes and Pleuronectiformes were attributed 
to functional groups of the same region in equal proportions between fish groups (Appendix A1). Catches labeled 
as Scombrids and Scombroidei were attributed to functional groups tuna-like and coastal scombrids and Indian 
mackerel. Tuna catches labeled Thuninni were attributed to both tuna -like and coastal scombrids.  
 
Landings (IUU + landings) and discards were summed by region defined as where the fish was caught regardless of 
the fishing country. Catches from unknown fishing grounds were assigned to the same region as that of the fishing 
country. The 1978 catches input into the Ecopath model are the sum of all landings and discards ( Appendix A2.1) 
because the distinction is not necessary to balance the model and because in Ecosim, it is not yet possible to input 
separate times series of discards. Thus, the temporal simulations (Ecosim) will run with total catch time series.  
 
Since catches were not reconstructed on the basis of effort (Zeller et al. 2013), it is difficult to link effort and fishing 
sectors which are defined differently among countries. In addition, the subsistence catch is derived from 
questionnaires, per capita consumption, and human population size, and thus not dir ectly linked on the number of 
inshore boats. For the time being, artisanal and subsistence catches are grouped under small -scale and 
attributed to small vessels. 
Effort 
Effort by type of boats has recently been estimated for the Indian fleet during the per iod 1950-2005, compiled by 
size of boats and engine power (horse power, hp) (Bhathal 2013). The small-scale fleet includes non-motorized 
traditional vessels and motorized traditional vessels with outboard motors of less than 50 hp (usually 7-9 hp). 
Industrial includes vessels using inboard motors of 50 hp and above and deep-sea fishing vessels using engines of 
120 hp and above. The industrial effort (labeled large vessels, A2.2) includes that of the large trawlers, fishi ng for 
lobsters, prawns and catching demersal fishes. The total effort account for the horse power and the number of 
days fished in a year (hp days, Appendix A2.2).  
 
The number of boats by type (inboard, outboard and non- motorised) was available for Sri Lanka (Joseph 1999; 
Samarayanke 2003) but it does not directly correspond to the catch statistics sectors (Zeller et al. 2013). The Sri 
Lanka boats with inboard engines (9 m long, 3.5 GT) may correspond to the industrial fleet catches while the boats 
with or without outboard engines can be attributed to the artisanal sector. In absence of correspondence between 
the Indian (hp days) and Sri Lanka (number of boats) data on effort, and absence of data in Bangladesh, the Indian 
effort (small-scale and industrial fleets) was used as a representative trend for region 2.  
 
For all other countries, it was not possible to obtain fishing effort. Most measurements of effort by type of boats 
(mechanised, non-mechanised, large vessels) cover only a few years and are known to be incomplete especially for 
small-scale fisheries. A reconstruction of effort time series is underway for several regions of the world at the UBC 
Fisheries Centre but there are still serious difficulties for the estimation for the small-scale and subsistence fishery 
(Krista Greer, UBC Fisheries Centre, pers. comm.).  
 