2020 Fisheries Centre Research Reports 28(2) 
 
24 
Shuntov and Dulepova, 1996). This ecosystem supports almost 70% of the total Russian catch in the Far East 
region and is populated by more than half a million tonnes of marine mammals. The fishery industry in this region 
is regulated via “fishery regulations” that set limits on fishing areas and on the total catch allowed for a certain 
period of time (Lapko and Radchenko, 2000).  
 
The goal of this research was to summarize various studies done in the region of the Okhotsk Sea during the 
1980s in a coherent Ecopath model. This Ecopath model (further referred to as NE model) was then compared to 
the already existing food web created by Shuntov and Dulepova (1997) for the same region and for same period. 
Comparison was made based on the biomass and energy flow values, as well as the number of the trophic levels. 
In order to make this comparison possible, food web was transformed into a second, somewhat simplified, 
Ecopath model (further referred to as SD model). It was hypothesized that the main parameters of the system’s 
energy flow in the NE Ecopath model would be similar to the conclusions drawn by Shuntov and Dulepova 
(1997) based on their energy diagram. 
 
The Ecopath modeling software was used to evaluate the impacts of fisheries on marine mammals in the 
ecosystem of the Okhotsk Sea (see www.ecopath.org). This approach analyzes food web interactions between the 
trophic levels of the entire region and is based on the works of Polovina (1984). It allows for a construction of a 
mass-balance model based on the prey-predator relationships between main groups of animals in the system 
(Christensen and Pauly, 1992a, 1992b). The model is based on information collected in the 1980s mostly by 
Russian scientists on all major species or groups of species found in the Okhotsk Sea. Ecosim simulation was 
performed to examine the impact of fisheries on the modeled system throughout a set period. It was 
hypothesized that increase in fishing effort would cause a reduction in the biomass of the higher-trophic level 
animals, such as marine mammals.  
 
Materials and Methods 
The Okhotsk Sea is located on the north-eastern the of Asian continent. It is bound by the Russian Federation 
and Japan. According to Shuntov (2001), the Okhotsk Sea is located in the temperate climate zone. The total 
area of the region is estimated to be about 1,590,000 km2. The Okhotsk Sea is the coldest of all of the Russian 
Far East seas with more than 50% of the region covered by ice for almost one third of the year. The average 
depth of the sea is about 821 meters with maximum depth of 3916 meters (Dobrovolsky and Zalogin 1982). 
 
Large phytoplankton blooms and active immigration of many species of fish and mammals occur in the region in 
the summer season. The Okhotsk shelf is one of the most productive regions in the Russian Far East. Because of 
the high productivity of the region, native people are highly dependent on the Okhotsk Sea resources (Okey 
2003). Agriculture in the surrounding regions is not developed well enough to have a significant impact on the 
health of the ecosystem. Commercial fisheries have a considerable influence on the area. In the 1960s, total 
annual catch in the region was about 1 million t, increasing to 2.4-2.6 million t in 1980s. Some of the parts of the 
Okhotsk Sea, such as West Kamchatka suffer from especially intensive fishing effort. Catches ranged from 8 to 
22 t∙km-2∙year-1 in 1970s (Lapko and Radchenko 2000). 
 
The 1980s were chosen because, due to the increased amount of funding available from the Soviet government, 
there was a vast amount of research carried out at that time. Also, the Okhotsk Sea did not appear to have 
suffered significant disturbances or changes during this period (Shuntov and Dulepova 1997).  
 
Shuntov and Dulepova (1997) also selected the 1980s for their energy-balanced food web of the Okhotsk Sea. 
This diagram had to be converted into a SD Ecopath model. The original food web consisted of eleven functional 
groups, including detritus. The SD Ecopath model had nine functional groups, including bacterioplankton and 
microzooplankton. These organisms play an important role in most ecosystems, and many ecologists, including 
