BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, 66(3): 543–566, 2000
543
MOTE SYMPOSIUM INVITED P APER
MARINE RESER VES AND THE RESTORATION OF FISHERIES
AND MARINE ECOSYSTEMS IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
Tony J. Pitcher, Reg W atson, Nigel Haggan, Sylvie Guénette,
Robin Kennish, Ussif R. Sumaila, David Cook,
Keith Wilson and Albert Leung
ABSTRACT
The South China Sea has been devastated by human fishing. This paper reports an
initiative to restore Hong Kong’ s marine ecosystems and fisheries through the deploy-
ment of artificial reefs (ARs) within marine protected areas (MP As). Current catch and
biomass data by species and fishery sector were available. Quasi-spatial ecosystem simu-
lations, using a modified ECOSIM method, have been employed to forecast benefits
from a successful MP A/AR system. Results indicate that, despite increasing fishing power
in the Hong Kong fleet, a 10–20% MP A/AR system could provide significant benefits
within 10 yrs, and shifts to low-value pelagic fish could be reversed. Approximate scores,
expressing how species benefit from protected ARs, suggest that results are not biased by
changes in species composition. The design of MP A/ARs balances island biogeographic
theory with the needs of monitoring and compliance: minimizing perimeter losses and
establishing colonizing corridors are trade-offs with statistical replication and monitor-
ing, whereas sacrifice of some ARs to fishing encourages compliance and learning. In
Hong Kong, workshops with fishing communities encouraged support. Bioeconomic
analysis shows an MPA/AR system increasing fishery value, but noncompliance rapidly
erodes benefits. The benefits of this approach are assessed together with problems and
difficulties that have arisen.
The marine ecosystem of the South China Sea is one of the most heavily affected by
human fishing in the world (Pauly et al., 1996; Silvestre and Pauly, 1997). In Hong Kong,
one of the few South China Sea locations where fisheries have been assessed quantita-
tively, the effects of uncontrolled trawling on benthic structure and fauna have been im-
mense (Leung and Lee, 1987; Wu, 1988; Gomez et al., 1990), catches have declined
markedly over the past 10 yrs (Richards, 1985; Richards et al., 1985; Cook et al., in
press), and fishing mortality rates are extremely high in seven gear sectors (Pitcher et al.,
1998). Trawling has large effects (Valente et al., 1996): for example in Tolo Harbor each
square meter may be trawled three times a day (K. Wilson, pers. comm.). Consequently,
the biomass of long-lived, high-value demersal fish species has been greatly reduced, if
not eliminated from many areas, and the species composition has shifted toward low-
value, short-lived pelagic fish, a dismal example of “fishing down the food web” (Pauly
et al., 1998a), also reported from the nearby East China Sea (Chen et al., 1997). Opportu-
nities for mitigating and reversing this depressing state appear slim (Heinke, 1996).
Misreported and unreported catches are rife, and capture fisheries management has been
effectively absent (Lai and Yu, 1995). Many of us fear that, if action is not taken, the
oceans over much of our planet may slowly come to look like the South China Sea (Pauly
et al., 1998b).
Here, we report an attempt to turn the tide. In the South China Sea, devastation has
proceeded so far that merely to mitigate the present depletion appears pointless: a policy
goal of sustainability (“sustaining the present misery,” Pitcher and Pauly, 1998), seems
544 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
inappropriate. Within the Special Administrative Region (SAR) of Hong Kong, the politi-
cal will, administrative ability, and legislative instruments that may regulate fishing and
restore the environment appear to be in place (ERM, 1997; Patten, 1997). The work at-
tempts practical implementation of a restoration ecology of the oceans (Pitcher, in press),
where the policy goal is to rebuild resources that are embedded in whole ecosystems, as
opposed to conventional fisheries rebuilding, which is largely confined to single-species
perspectives. Modeling to support rebuilding is shaped and constrained by the “Back to
the Future” process, the model reconstruction of past ecosystems (Pitcher, 1998), and
“Ecoval,” the comparative evaluation of the benefits of alternative ecosystems (Pitcher et
al., in press). Although we face a large number of uncertainties in a highly species-rich
environment, the work in Hong Kong reported here represents a first step in that process.
B
ACKGROUND TO MPAS AND ARS IN HONG KONG
In 1994 the Hong Kong government decided to implement an evaluation plan for local
fisheries (Wilson and Cook, 1998). Since 1997, the Hong Kong SAR has continued that
plan into a mitigation, restoration, and community-outreach phase (ERM, 1997). The
Fisheries Centre at the University of British Columbia has been involved in both of these
stages, along with partners in Hong Kong’ s government, university, and private sectors.
(The two projects have involved Environmental Resources Management Ltd.; Furano
Ltd.; Hong Kong City University; the University of Hong Kong; the Southampton Ocean-
ography Centre; Babtie, Harris and Sutherland Ltd.; and the Agriculture and Fisheries
Department of the Hong Kong SAR Government.) Marine protected areas (MP As) have
been included in the project to reduce fishing and allow recovery of stocks. They are
termed ‘Marine Special Areas’ in Hong Kong to allow a legislative basis for control (ERM,
1999). Artificial reefs (ARs) are being considered for Hong Kong MPAs because much
reef habitat has been destroyed, and stock recovery needs a kick start (Wilson and Cook,
1998). It is realized that ARs without MPAs are dangerous to recovery because they may
serve only to concentrate fish resources (see, e.g., Polovina, 1989), which can then be
fished out more easily, and that, in Hong Kong, MP As without ARs (see Allison et al.,
1998) would probably not attract and conserve valuable reef species that have been al-
most wiped out. Moreover, legislation to support the establishment and protection of the
MP A/ARs with statutory controls as Marine Special Areas in Hong Kong is being en-
acted (ERM, 1999), overseen by the Agriculture and Fisheries Department (see Cook,
1994). Recovery after protection is rapid for many fish species in these tropical inshore
waters, as evidenced by the early colonization of sunken-vessel ARs already placed in a
Marine Park in Hong Kong (Leung et al., 1995).
M
ETHODS
FISHER Y CATCHES AND FISH BIOMASS.—Estimates of the 1996 Hong Kong biomass and catch by
seven gear sectors were available for 152 species: full details of the surveys and assessment meth-
ods are presented elsewhere (Pitcher et al., 1998). The estimated catch by sector, including confi-
dence limits, is given in Table 1. The present annual catch is some 15,000 mt, about 8 mt km
-2), of
which over 40% are small pelagics, caught by about 2500 vessels. In Hong Kong, both large-scale
and small-scale fishers are fishing heavily enough to have significant impacts on both biomass and
biodiversity. Over half the catch by weight and by number of species is made by the 10% of the fleet
545PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
comprising the industrial sector, but 46% of the catch by weight and 80% of the species caught
come from over 3500 small vessels operating a great diversity of hand gear types. T welve out of 13
fish species for which single-species stock assessments were performed were in the U.N. Food and
Agriculture Organization’ s “over-exploited” category, whereas one fish species and four benthic
crustaceans were assessed as “fully exploited.” Total fish biomass in Hong Kong varies seasonally
between about 10,000 and 27,000 mt (5–15 mt km
-2), 60% of which are small pelagics. This bio-
mass, like those of other parts of the South China Sea, is considerably lower than those of
many other inshore marine areas (Pitcher et al., 1998).
ECOSYSTEM SIMULATION METHODS.—Our approach to the analysis of the impact of fishing in Hong
Kong’ s multispecies fishery is based on trophic structure as revealed by the mass-balance ECOP ATH
system (Christensen and Pauly, 1992), which has been widely applied to aquatic ecosystems (see
contributions in Christensen and Pauly, 1993, and http://www.ecopath.org). ECOPATH itself pro-
vides a static picture of ecosystem trophic structure, answering the question, ‘What trophic flows
support the current ecosystem trophic structure and are consistent with observed growth and mor-
tality?’—but our main analytic tool has been ECOSIM, a system of coupled differential equations
that can be used for dynamic simulation and analysis of alternative scenarios (Walters et al., 1997)
and can answer ‘what if?’ questions. In the past, fisheries work has ignored the ratchet-like pro-
cesses that erode biodiversity and the value of aquatic resources (Pitcher, in press), and many have
called for an ecosystem basis to management (e.g., Larkin, 1996; Botsford et al., 1997). Marine
reserves are an obvious device to consider (Bohnsack, 1993, 1996; Clark, 1996; Guénette et al.,
1998; Lauck et al., 1998), but their impact must be assessed on an ecosystem basis. The transition
from single-species to ecosystem modeling has also been discussed for terrestrial reserves
(Simberloff, 1997). Implicit in our modeling is that recovery of stocks within the MPA/ARs will
increase catches outside them (Russ and Alcala, 1996a). Despite considerable uncertainty about the
simulation of ecological processes, we believe that the important questions can be tackled only by
means of an ecosystem-based methodology. The methods used here represent a first step.
The ECOP ATH mass-balance model for Hong Kong was refined from that used in previous
work, which was, in turn, based on earlier South China Sea work (Pauly and Christensen, 1993) and
work in the Brunei Darussalam coastal area, south of Hong Kong (Silvestre et al., 1993). Full
details are presented elsewhere (Pitcher et al., 1998), but where not otherwise mentioned, data came
from our own survey material. The mass-balance model comprised 16 functional groups (biomass
pools), in addition to phytoplankton, zooplankton (based on Nguyen, 1989; Plyakarnchana, 1989;
Aryuthaka, 1991), and detritus (Table 2). The biomass of these ecosystem components in the mass-
balance model is shown in Table 3, which also summarizes the other model parameters. Diets and
htiwrehtegot,6991niyrehsifgnoKgnoHehtnirotcesraegybhctaclaunnadetamitsE.1elbaT
repdnaseicepsrephctaclaunnanaemmorfdetamitseerasehctaC.)LC(stimilecnedifnoc%59
gnihsifepythcaefoslessevforebmuN.setarhctacfosnoitubirtsidlamrongolmorfepytlessev
hctacdnasyevruslessevmorfdetamitseerathguacseicepsforebmundnasretawgnoKgnoHni
csiM.sweivretni = egac,tenllig,enildnah,enilgnol(sepytraegtnereffidetarepotahtslessev
7/4P;)spart = .spartdnaenildnahylniamgnitareposlessevllams
rytm(hctacdetamitsE 1- )h ctacnaeMf orebmuN
slessev
gnihsif
forebmuN
seiceps
detroper
rewoLr eppUl essevrep
LC%59n aeML C%59r ytm( 1- )
lwartpmirhS5 429 780 39,39 .41 918 5
lwartgnaH0 443 92,16 72,58 .836 32 2
lwartnretS8 712 758 83,36 .713 35 5
staob7/4P9 094 69,33 09,320 .20 86,15 01
staobcsiM8 472 48,27 51,713 .63 046 9
lwartriaP5 893 65,12 15,0624 .0715 18 1
eniesesruP0 363 36,36 55,841 .335 316 4
latoT4 31,47 47,412 27,2630 .32 94,22 51
546 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
sretemarapfo
noitavireD.sutirted
dna,notknalpotyhp,notknalpooz
ot
noitidda
niledomecnalab-ssam
gnoK
gnoHeht
ni
desuspuorgcimonoxaT.2elbaT
.)8991(.laterehctiP
yb
debircsedsi
puorg
hcaerof
puorGd
edulcniseicepS
stnemmoC
sdieaneP:
eadieaneP
atabrabsispoeanepate
M
,
sisnemlap.
M
,s
dieaneprehtolla
dna
(
sispoeanepate
M
,
sueaneP
,
sispoeaneparaP,areconeloS
;)e
aditsegreS
gnidulcni
acinopajsetcA
)pmirhsrevlis(
)4891(
uS
dna
oaiL
no
desabteiD
snaecatsurccihtneB
surilunaP
,)retsbol(
,alliuqsoipraH,sidbyrahCa
lliuqsotarO,alliuqsoytciD
,
allycS
dna,)barcevorgnam(
sunutroP
cihtneb
dieaneplla;e
kilsnaecatsurc
:eadilliuqS(
pmirhssitnam
alliuqsotarO,alliuqsoipraH
eadireconeloS
dna)
)pmirhs
dum(
scsullomcihtneB:
eadicrA
aradanA
:eadireneV;)elkcoc(
sepaT
:eadiniccuB;)malc(
ainolybaB
)klehw(
sohtneboozllamS
,adotameN,arefinimaroF(sohtneboiem
dnasohtneborcamllamS
apraHc ,
adiocit,
atailiC,adopepoC,airallebruT,adocartsO,
adilumotsohtanG
ateahcyloP,ahcirtortsaG, ,
adiracocatsy
M,ahcnyhroniK,ateahcogilO
,airadinC,aozoyrB,aecadianaT,adiracolahpeC,
anitremeN,adilucnupiS
)adargidraT
dna
ylno
hctaclaicremmoceht
morFd
eifitnedinu
snihcruaesn
o
desabsretemarap(n
oitamrofni
te
nospmohT
morfd
na
nihS;0891,.la
,dnanasli
W
dnaamraS;2891,nospmohT.
)4991
sdopolahpeC(
eadinigiloLlla,supotcosedulcnI
silude
ogiloL
,
ogiloL
,.ps
sihtuetoipeS
anainossel
sdiuqs,), (
eadinniP
rolocib
anniP
(eadiipeS,)lessum
naf,
aipeS
sinoarahp
,
aipeS
)hsifelttuc,.ps
shcnarbomsalE,
skrahs
oobmab:skrahS
muillycsolihC
;gnogebbow;
subolotcerO
;
sunihrahcraC
(syar,)
,ajaR,sitaysaD
dna
arunmyG
)
morf
detropereraskrahs
yna
Mg
noK
gnoH
dna
nahC(sretawo
ngapmoC;2891,gnesT
;yadoterarerastnediser,)b,a4891d
na(
hctaceht
era)ledom.
syar
yb
detanimod
hsiflasremedllamS (<
)mc
03
,eadiepulC,eadignaraC,eadinogopA,eadissabmA,
eadierreG,eadissolgonyC
,eadirtnecamoP,eadiretpimeN,eadillu
M
,eadihtangoieL,eadiiboG
.eadinagiS
dna,eadinarreS,eadineaprocS,eadineaicSm
orf
noitamrofniemoS
.)2891(
gnesT
dna
nahC
hsiflasremed
muide
M (>
,mc
03
<
)mc
05
,eadinearu
M,eadiligu
M,eadihtnacano
M,eadinajtuL,eadinaperD,eadignaraC
,eadineaicS,eadigahpotacS,eadimenyloP,eadisotolP,eadiretpimeN
dna,eaditnodonyS,eadietamortS,eadirapS,eadinigalliS,eadinarreS
eadinoparehT
547PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
deunitnoC.2elbaT
puorGd
edulcniseicepS
stnemmoC
hsiflasremedegraL (>
)mc
05
,eadinajtuL,eadinirhteL,eadilumeaH,eadignaraC,
eadiligu
M
,eadyhthcilaraP,eadicosenearu
M,
eadirapS,eadineaicS,eadilahpecytalP
eadiruihcirT
dna,eaditnodonyS,eadietamortS
dnasreppansregralehT.
cte,srekaorc
slasremed
yrotargi
M;
eadirapS
rojamsurgaP,
ograp
derro
maerbaes
der
seulav
Qesohwseiceps
wef
Ae
rom
mees)3ac(
nahtcigalep)
61
ot
7(lasremed
hsifcigaleP
,eadiluargnE,eadiepulC,eadilytcadoliehC,eadihpolortneC,eadignaraC
eadirbmocS
dna,eadineaicS,eadisohpyK,eadilumeaH
scigalep
yrotargi
M:
)sgnirreh(eadiepulC
sutatcnup
nodonapulC
,
asliH
eadirbmocS;.pps
:)slerekcam(
nosremmocrebmocS
,
sutattug.S
,
sucinopaj.S
,
rebmocS
;.pps
:)aducarrab(eadoinearyhpS
anearyhpS
:)kcud
yabmob(eaditnodonyS;.ps
suerehen
nodapraH
slammamenira
M(
elahw
dekaeb
dehtoot-ogkniG
snedogknig
nodolpose
M
)c
ificaP-odnI,
(
nihplod
kcabpmuh
sisnenihc
asuoS
(
nihplod
dehtoot-hguor,)
onetS
sisnenaderb
nihplod
dedis-etihwcificaP,)(
snediuqilbosuhcnyhronegaL
,)
(
nihplodesonelttob
sutacnurtspoisruT
dettopslaciportnap,)(
nihplod
allenetS
ataunetta
(
nihplod
depirts,)
ablaoelureoc.S
(
nihplod
nommoc,)
sunihpleD
sihpled
,)(
esiopropsselnif
dna
sedioneacohp
aneacohpoeN
)
.late
nosreffeJ
morftsiLo
t
gnidroccA.)3991(
kcabpmuh
001,)7991(
nosreffeJd
nasnihplod
.gnoK
gnoH
niedisersesiopropsselnif
051
548 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
parameter values for each component were obtained from the literature, as described in detail else-
where (Pitcher et al., 1998). The model was balanced as described by Christensen and Pauly (1992)
and further tuned to estimated fish biomass values from the survey.
QUASI-SPATIAL DYNAMIC ECOSYSTEM SIMULATIONS.—Modifications were made to the ECOSIM eco-
system-simulation method (Walters et al., 1997) to allow biomass for each ecosystem component
to be split in a quasi-spatial way. Technical details are given by Watson and Walters (1998). The
method is simpler than spatially explicit modeling (ECOSP ACE, Walters et al., 1999), which was
first implemented after we completed this work. Currently, the quasi-spatial model can provide
more structured outputs of the likely benefits against MP A size.
In this method, each biomass pool from an ECOP ATH mass-balance model is divided into two
portions that can be subjected to different fishing patterns, as if they were spatially separated. This
method allows for one part to be modeled as a no-take MP A while the other is subject to fishing
mortality. Fishing patterns can be shaped sector by sector to simulate a wide range of changes in
fishing pressures. The rate of migration or transfer of biomass between the two parts of each biomass
pool can be set individually. For example, if the MP A size is set at 0.05, then 5% of the initial
biomass of each component in the ECOP ATH model of Hong Kong will be inside the modeled
MP A. Therefore, for each ECOP ATH biomass pool, j:
Biomassj,MP A = (Proportion of system as MP A) ¥ (Biomass for ECOP ATH pool j)
Biomassj,non-MP A = (Biomass for ECOP ATH pool j) – Biomassj,MP A
The rate of biomass exchange, representing migration, between the subpools of the MP A and
non-MP A is determined by two factors in the model—first a user-supplied rate of migration value
and second the portion of the total area that the subpool occupies. The migration-rate model reflects
rofseulavgnitratssadesuspuorgmetsysoce51ehtrofsretemarapledomecnalab-ssaM.3elbaT
mktmegarevasissamoiB.snoitalumismetsysocegnoKgnoHeht 2- mktmsihctac, 2- ry 1- emoS.
.tupnierasrehto;ledomecnalab-ssamehtybdetamitseerew,levelcihportelpmaxerof,sretemarap
B/P = B/Q;oitarssamoib-ot-noitcudorp = EE;oitarssamoib-ot-noitpmusnoc = cihportoce
esabatadhctacgnoKgnoHehtnidedulcniseicepshsifforebmunehtswohselbatehT.ycneiciffe
.hctacehtnitontubgnoKgnoHnitneserpebotnwonkseicepsfosrebmunehtedisgnola
puorG
ssamoiB
mktm( -2)
hctaCt m
mk -2 ry -1
/P B
ry 1-
B/Q
ry 1-
EE
noitroporp
cihporT
level
.pps#
hctacni
ton.pps#
hctacni
notknalpotyhP 00.31- 0 .132-9 8.00 .1--
notknalpooZ0 3.71- 0 .040 .2910 5.01 .2--
)snwarp(sdieaneP 40.06 1.00 .70 .035 9.08 .25 17
snaecatsurccihtneB6 4.00 6.00 .70 .035 9.08 .22 12
scsullomcihtneB9 0.11 0.04 .30 .055 9.09 .252
sohtneboozllamS 02.531 0.05 .50 .039 3.00 .2--
sdopolahpeC0 4.05 3.00 .23 .75 9.06 .380
shcnarbomsalE 60.01 0.03 .00 .72 7.03 .330
hsiflasremedllamS 70.13 2.30 .40 .515 9.08 .21 36 2
hsiflasremedmuideM 88.06 6.15 .30 .85 9.01 .32 38 2
hsiflasremedegraL 40.05 2.00 .25 .55 6.09 .31 29 1
slasremedyrotargiM 82.01 0.05 .20 .015 9.04 .320
hsifcigaleP 56.02 1.15 .40 .515 9.01 .35 15 1
scigalepyrotargiM 25.07 1.02 .20 10.5 9.05 .386
slammameniraM 10.0- 3 .00 .040 0.08 .39 ( .)-
slatoT9 9.078 5.7- - - - 2 513 01
549PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
the larger ratio of perimeter to area of smaller MP As; in smaller areas animals are more likely to
cross the MP A boundary and move out into the fishery. If P is the proportion of the fishery area that
is an MP A, and M is a user-supplied migration-index value, then the migration rates in and out of
the MP A area for a biomass pool, j, can be represented as:
Migration M Pj MPA, to non-MPA =
Migration Migration P Pj non MPA j MPA,, - to MPA  to non-MPA=¥ - ( )( )1
The rates into and out of the MP A have to be in equilibrium (regardless of the MP A size) before
we make changes to the system, such as fishing only outside the MP A. The rate of movement out is
M/÷(P), and the balancing movement in is M/÷ (P) ¥ (P/(1 – P)), which reduces to M ¥ (P/(1 – P)).
This is a binomial term because, as the proportion in the MP A pool gets smaller, the non-MPA pool
must become larger because P + (1 – P) = 1. The rate of immigration must balance the emigration
in absolute biomass terms, and therefore the proportional rate, which is expressed as a proportion
of the biomass per area, must be prorated by the relative area of the MP A (P) and non-MPA (1 – P)
areas.
We do not have actual movement rates of the species comprising the ECOP ATH pools for Hong
Kong that could be used for our MP A simulations. We therefore assumed that groups containing
more sedentary species, for example ‘benthic molluscs’, would have lower migration rates than
other groups such as ‘migratory pelagics’. Trials with ECOSIM demonstrated that the predicted
impact of MP As changed with the assumed overall migration rates for the biomass pools. To dem-
onstrate the sensitivity of subsequent biological and economic results to assumed migration rates,
we used rates considered to yield slow, medium, and fast movement for the organisms involved
(Table 4). In this paper only the results from the slow and fast assumptions are presented; the
medium results were intermediate in each case.
Animals like sea cucumbers do not move at the same rate as tuna and would therefore probably
not move out of an MP A at the same rate (regardless of the MPA size). A value of M = 0 implies no
transfer at all between the MPA and non-MP A areas. In practice, values M < 0.1 produced very little
exchange, whereas M > 5 made the MP A very ‘permeable’, and biomass moved very freely. Ac-
cordingly, in the ‘fast’ schedule of rates in Table 4, the rates for each ECOP ATH model group
maintained their natural relative rankings by taxa, and M caused a rate of exchange under which
even moderately mobile animals were moving out of the MP A. In the ‘slow’ scenario, even migra-
tory animals had some protection from fishing. We believe that these two extreme scenarios more
than encompass the likely natural range of movements. In practice, the monitoring of MPAs could
be designed to allow estimates of these rates from observations or tagging programs.
Our simulations were based on the assumption that no fishing took place inside the MP A/AR
area. The MPA biomass subpool was therefore not subject to fishing mortality, and all fishing
mortality and harvests were assumed to come from the non-MP A area. As the MP A/AR size was
increased from 0 to 20% of the total area, fishing became concentrated in a decreasing fraction of
the current fishing grounds. It was assumed that fishing mortality would not decrease as the size of
the MP A increased, because without additional regulatory instruments, we did not anticipate any
decrease in either fishing effort, catchability, or efficiency outside of the MPA area simulated.
Therefore, fishing mortality increased in the fished area in order to maintain the overall level of
fishing mortality.
Quasi-spatial ecosystem simulations were produced for MP A sizes ranging from 0.5 to 20% of
the total Hong Kong area over a period of 30 yrs. It was assumed that, over this time, in the absence
of mitigating measures such as MP A/ARs, increasing fishing pressures would cause some degrada-
tion in the fisheries of Hong Kong. We believe this is the safest and most precautionary assumption
550 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
for our analysis, especially when an economic analysis must include discounting of future streams
of benefits. We therefore used an annual rate of increase in fishing mortality based on historical
records. A decrease in annual catch for Hong Kong waters of 21% over 7 yrs between 1989 and
1996 has been documented (Cook et al., in press), so our simulations used an annual increase in
fishing mortality of 3% over the period simulated.
R
EEF RESPONSE INDEX (RRI): AN ASSESSMENT OF SPECIES RESPONSES TO ARS.—Individual species
will benefit differentially from the ARs, but the ecosystem simulation method necessarily uses
pools of species. Were the responses of these pools biased because some species did better than
others in the ARs? For example, reef-associated fish species with a vestigial presence in Hong
Kong, but not currently recorded in the catch, might recover sufficiently to appear in the catch. On
the other hand, the present ecosystem model pools might be biased against reef species. To answer
this question we devised a scoring technique for a Reef Response Index (RRI), intended to express
the rate at which species’ biomass would recover.
Our method assumes that species that depend on rocky reefs for at least one stage of their life
history are likely to benefit from ARs. The scoring method also required that we make some as-
sumptions about the circumstances in which the AR would be deployed, as well as the role that an
AR would play in the life history of the species under consideration. For example, when relief
structures and/or rocky bottoms are limiting, some species may be aided by artificial reefs; an
example is the increase in octopus population around Japan when ARs were deployed (Bohnsack et
al., 1997). For our purposes we assume that ARs would be set on soft sediment zones, because hard-
bottom and soft-bottom food resources are thought to be linked for several species (Frazer and
Lindberg, 1994). We also assumed that ARs would be complex structures providing a wide range of
shelter sizes and crevices to accommodate both juveniles and adults.
We assessed the potential benefit for each species, using ranked scores for six life-history and
behavioral attributes: home range, fidelity to reefs, spawning, nurseries, feeding, and refuge (Table
5). Species depending on reefs at every stage would have the highest total score, obtain the maxi-
mum benefit from the AR, and have the greatest change in productivity and subsequently catch.
Sedentary species, especially those dependent on reefs, are good candidates. We assigned average
scores to each family but found that differences in the life-history patterns of species within fami-
lies required us to attempt to score all the major commercial species (255 in our Hong Kong data-
ssamoibmetsysocefogniledomAPMrofdesu)sselnoisnemid,M(secidninoitargiM.4elbaT
.txetees,setarehtfonoissucsidllufroF.snoitalumisMISOCElaitaps-isauqehtnisloop
puorGHTAPOCEw olSm uideMt saF
notknalpotyhP1 .02 .04 .0
notknalpooZ1 .02 .04 .0
sdieaneP5 .012
snaecatsurccihtneB5 .012
scsullomcihtneB5 .012
sohtneboozllamS5 .012
sdopolahpeC1 2 4
shcnarbomsalE1 2 4
hsiflasremedllamS1 2 4
hsiflasremedmuideM1 2 4
hsiflasremedegraL1 2 4
slasremedyrotargiM2 4 8
hsifcigaleP1 2 4
scigalepyrotargiM2 4 8
slammameniraM2 4 8
sutirteD1 .02 .04 .0
551PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
base) individually. When only the genus was mentioned (e.g., Gymnothorax sp.) we assumed that
its characteristics were those of the majority of species within the genus in Asia. When in doubt, we
used a minimum score to keep the results conservative. Species were scored by three members of
the project team who used life-history information from FishBase 97 (Froese and Pauly, 1997), and
by two members and one additional scientist expert on Hong Kong reef fishes. For each species, the
ratio of the sum of the six scores to the maximum score, expressed as a percentage, constituted the
RRI.
D
ESIGN PRINCIPLES FOR AN MP A/AR SYSTEM.—Three sets of principles governed our design of the
MP A/AR system in Hong Kong: first, biogeographic principles, aimed at maximizing ecological
changes; second, statistical principles, aimed at permitting valid detection of ecological changes;
and third, social principles, aimed at minimizing losses from illegal fishing.
B
IOGEOGRAPHIC PRINCIPLES.—A basic principle of biogeography, the species/area curve, is widely
adopted in the design of terrestrial reserves and demonstrates why the ratio of a reserve’ s area to its
perimeter be maximized. Species-area curves demonstrating a logarithmic relationship between
area and number of species have long been a basic tool of biogeography (Krebs, 1972: 530–537).
Originally devised to account for the numbers of species found on oceanic islands, the theoretical
model considered the balance between colonization (or immigration) and local extinction (Macarthur
and Wilson, 1967). Later, the principle has been extended to ecological entities, such as nature
reserves and no-take marine areas, that, by virtue of major discontinuities in habitat with contigu-
ous areas, act analogously to islands (see, e.g., Hart and Horowitz, 1991). Species-area theory has
been applied to reserves (e.g., by Boecklen, 1997) and specifically to marine reserves and artificial
reefs (Bohnsack, 1991). The rate of loss of species (= local extinction) from an ‘island’ is related to
area, absolute population size, and perimeter. Loss is proportional to area divided by perimeter, a
ratio at a geometric minimum for a circle. For many types of organisms, extinctions are more
common in fragmented habitats (see, e.g., Soulé et al., 1992). Colonization rates, on the other hand,
are based not on ‘island’ geometry but on the distance (and ease of travel) to the nearest source of
suitable species—another island or a large ‘continental’ refugium.
foximseicepsehtotdeilppasecidnIesnopseRfeeRetamitseotdesuairetircgnirocS.5elbaT
rehtodna,%001otdetauqesaw42foerocsmumixamehT.puorgmetsysoceybsehctaclaitnetop
.ylgnidroccadelacsslatot
etubirttayrotsih-efiL airetircgnirocS
egnaremoH stnemevomgnideef-eguferylnoroyratnedeS.4
yrotargimyletaredoM.2
senidras.g.e,yrotargiM.0
sfeerotytilediF (feerotfeermorflevartrolayoL.4 < )mk5
)raeyehtfotraptneserp(layolyletaredoM.2
tneisnarT.0
gninwapS sfeeresU.4
sfeeresuyaM.2
sfeeresutonoD.0
seiresruN sfeeresU.4
sfeeresuyaM.2
sfeeresutonoD.0
gnideeF tnedneped-feeR.4
sfeeresuylnommoC.2
citsinutroppO.0
egufeR tnedneped-feeR.4
sfeeresumodleS.2
sfeeresutonoD.0
552 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
Therefore, first, MPAs should be circular, to minimize the loss rate, although, in practice, local
topography will impose some constraints (Begon et al., 1990). Second, AR modules should be
closely packed to form larger units rather than spread out over the deployment area, and they should
be located near sources of colonizing individuals, ideally near sources of both adults and juveniles/
larvae.
Corridor theory (see, e.g., Gilbert et al., 1998) is a third important design feature for terrestrial
reserves and is relevant for planning marine reserves because reef species may not leave cover for
barren trawled areas. Without protected corridors, no-take reserves may act more like isolated is-
lands, so the disadvantages of small size such as restricted gene flow and local extinction cannot be
mitigated by assured recolonization. Schmeigelow (1997) says, “All reserve designs have ecologi-
cal and economic trade-offs that should be explicit in planning and implicit in monitoring. Corri-
dors, with their emphasis on maintaining connections, reinforce the need for integrated manage-
ment of reserve and non-reserve areas, if the objective of establishing healthy populations and self-
sustaining ecosystems in reserve networks is to be realized.” Protected corridors, however, may be
difficult to enforce.
S
TATISTICAL PRINCIPLES.—Replication is essential for statistical validation of changes after the
establishment of the MPA/AR system. A world-wide review of ARs (ERM, 1997) shows that they
have generally been established with almost no thought to how their effects might be monitored
scientifically. Another major consideration in design is the ability to assess and learn from the
performance of the MP A/AR. For example, design that allows us to estimate migration rates will
improve the simulations. Fishery openings will aid evaluation, provided they are adequately con-
trolled.
S
OCIAL AND ECONOMIC PRINCIPLES.—Economic trade-offs in reserve design are reviewed by Sumaila
(1998a), but it is becoming increasingly clear that management of marine areas only works with the
consent of the people affected (Beaumont, 1997; Sumaila et al., in press). It is unlikely that jurisdic-
tions can ever provide enough police or money to enforce regulations in the seas (Haggan, 1998).
Solutions are seen as a local and community role in management and a sense of community owner-
ship in the adoption of policy goals and in sanctions to encourage compliance (Pinkerton, 1989;
Pinkerton and Weinstein, 1995; Brown, 1998; Jentoft, 1998). Design of the MP A/AR system in
Hong Kong has therefore attempted to take account of these requirements.
E
NGAGING THE SUPPORT OF LOCAL FISHING COMMUNITIES.—In 1996 an experimental AR in Hong
Kong that had attracted large reef fish was reportedly fished out by local fishers (Morton, 1996).
Therefore, from the outset, engagement of the support of local fishing communities in Hong Kong
was included in planning. Experience in the region (Russ and Alcala, 1989; Pomeroy, 1995) and
elsewhere (Neis, 1995) shows that, without this support, likely benefits will be quickly eroded by
noncompliance. Two sets of 10 public forums involving 16 fishers’ organizations were held (ERM,
1999). In November 1997, the first stage introduced the concept and issues, supported by a video
and brochure, and received concerns and comments. The second stage, in March 1998, also sup-
ported by a video, sought comments on specific locations, designs, and management plans. In
addition consultations were held with 15 SAR government departments, five quasi-autonomous
nongovernmental organizations (quasi-NGOs or ‘quangos’), 11 university and conservation groups,
and 20 groups representing shipping interests.
RESULTS
ESTIMATING THE BENEFITS OF MPA/AR SYSTEM
Ecosystem Modeling.—Figure 1 illustrates our principal results for fished groups in
the ecosystem. Forecast biomass and catch for seven key ecosystem groups after 30 yrs is
plotted relative to the present (1996) biomasses listed in Table 1. Three scenarios are
plotted: the status quo with no MP A/AR, MP A/ARs comprising 10% of the total area, and
553PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
MP A/ARs comprising 20%. Results are shown for the ‘slow’ migration assumptions.
Differences for the ‘fast’ migration assumption are indicated by bars.
Without MP A/ARs, biomass for small, large, and migratory demersal fishes and mi-
gratory pelagics declined, probably because of our 3% annual increase in fishing mortal-
ity (Fig. 1A). Groups heavily preyed upon by these harvested groups, such as pelagic fish
and prawns, increased in biomass—a food-web response. For the same reason, medium
demersal fish showed little change in biomass. An increase in pelagics is a common result
of heavy fishing on demersals.
At first sight, it is surprising that the decline in the biomass of some groups was not
reflected in significantly reduced catch forecasts (Fig. 1B)—catches of small, large, and
migratory demersal fish are not much reduced under the no-MP A/AR scenario. This phe-
nomenon is recognized as contributing to the loss of many fisheries. Within our model it
comes about because fishing mortality increases and catches are therefore maintained
despite declining biomass. In real fisheries, it also occurs because some species continue
to aggregate in high-density, readily catchable schools, even as their biomass declines
dangerously (Pitcher, 1995, 1997; Mackinson et al., 1997). Changes in biomass are not
Figure 1. Simulation results for seven fished groups after 30 yrs in the Hong Kong ecosystem.
Forecast biomass (A, upper) and catch (B, lower) is plotted relative to the present (1996) biomass.
Three scenarios are plotted: the status quo with no MP A/AR (solid column), 10% MP A/AR (grey
column), and 20% MP A/AR (open column). Results are shown for ‘slow’ migration assumptions in
the model (see text): differences for ‘fast’ migration assumption are indicated by bars. Functional
species groups in the model were: s dem = small demersal fish; m dem = medium demersal fish; l
dem = large demersal fish; mig dem = migratory demersal fish; pel = pelagic fish; mig pel =
migratory pelagic fish; prawn = penaeids. For further details see text.

554 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
detected until the fishery fails catastrophically (see Hutchings, 1996). We believe, there-
fore, that this is a realistic model response.
Catches of pelagics and prawns increased from 41 to 50% under the no-MP A/AR sce-
nario. Forecast catch by fishing sector is shown in Figure 2. All sectors increased their
catch; the purse seiners (35%), pair trawlers (34%), and shrimp trawlers (63%) showed
the greatest gains. The small vessels (categories P4/7s and misc) increased their catch by
about 20% despite large shifts in species composition because they employ a wide range
of gears. The model suggests that, without MP A/ARs and with increasing effort, the total
catch from Hong Kong will actually rise 25% to about 20,000 mt, but this increase will be
accompanied by major shifts in species composition. The model clearly shows why fish-
eries can continue to make profits in the face of the most drastic ecosystem depletion.
Why does the simulated catch not decline as a result of stock collapses and species
shifts, as appears to have happened over the past decade? The ecosystem model is capable
of generating decreases in biomass and catch for functional groups: in this work it did so
for some groups when fishing effort was not allowed to rise each year. Perhaps fish catch
in the South China Sea has reached a position down the food web occupied by such high-
turnover, low-trophic-level species that they are unlikely to be subject to recruitment col-
lapses in the same way as traditional long-lived demersal fishes.
Figure 1 shows that, as the MP A/AR proportion increased, the reserve progressively
mitigated most of these changes and shifted the species composition of both the ecosys-
tem and the catch back toward demersal fish. Even under the fast-migration option, the
same trend was seen, except that the large demersal group suffered progressively smaller
losses rather than making larger gains. In Figure 1 we can see that the rise in pelagic fish
biomass was halted by the 20% MP A/AR, although prawns still showed a small increase.
The big increase in large demersals prevented small and medium demersals, their main
prey, from changing very much in either catch or biomass. The catch for this group of
high-value fishes rose under all migration-speed options.
Figure 2. Annual catch in the Hong Kong fishery by gear sector as forecast by ecosystem simulations.
Present day (solid columns), after 30 yrs with no MP A/AR (grey columns), and after 30 yrs with
MP A/AR (open columns). HT = Hang trawler, PT = Pair trawler, SHT = Shrimp trawler, ST = Stern
trawler, PS = Purse seine, Misc = Vessels that operate different gear types (longline, handline, gill
net, cage trap); P4/7 = Small vessels operating mainly handline and trap.

555PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
In the 20% MP A/AR scenario all sectors showed an increase in catch. The most spec-
tacular increases were in the small-vessel sector (Misc: 200%; P4/7s: 112%), but prawn
trawlers and pair trawlers showed rather small increases, whereas purse seiners showed a
decrease compared to the no-MP A/AR option. The total annual catch forecast doubled
compared to the present day to about 29,000 mt, and the species composition of the catch
shifted strongly toward demersal species (percentage pelagic halved to 26%).
At first sight, this finding appears to raise a barrier to implementing the MPA/AR
system, as the sectors most likely to benefit are small-scale fishers, who are relatively
unorganized and do not have a strong lobby. As demersal fish recover, however, larger-
scale commercial fishing of these high-value fish, which are much in demand in Hong
Kong, will probably shift the emphasis of the present-day fishing sectors, which have
adapted to making a profit in a heavily depleted system.
The results for the ‘medium’ and ‘fast’ migration show that, as migration speed in-
creases, and with it the rate of exchange between the MP A and the fished non-MP A area,
the benefits of the MP A are reduced. At the high migration speeds, the MPA biomass is
no longer much protected against increasing fishing pressure, because individuals move
outside the MP A more frequently and are quickly caught. Uncontrolled fishing (or cheat-
ing) in the MP A area also rapidly erodes the advantages.
R
EEF RESPONSE INDEX (RRI)
Of the 152 species scored, 108 (71%) received RRI scores below 33%, suggesting that
we could not find life-history criteria supporting increased production from ARs. Of those
species receiving low scores, 61 (56%) had insufficiently complete life-history data for
assessment. Of those receiving scores higher than 25%, the median score was 66%. The
highest-scoring species were in the families Pomacentridae, Muraenidae, and Palinuridae.
Figure 3 (solid columns) shows the distribution of RRI scores for six fish groups from
the ECOP ATH model. Most pelagic fish have lower RRIs; most demersal fish have higher
ones. Although the largest number of high RRIs were found among the demersal groups,
RRI had no straightforward relationship with reef-related life-history characteristics. For
example, the small demersal fish group contained members of the high-scoring
Pomacentridae (damselfish) but also the low-scoring Leiognathidae (pony fish). Revised
modeling might split the groups into reef-related and reef-unrelated groups on the basis
of RRI.
About 105 species are known, from dive surveys and the like, to be present in very low
numbers in Hong Kong, but are not represented in the reported catch of 152 species.
When these species increase in numbers as a result of the MP A/AR, if they were to shift
the distributions of RRIs for an ECOPATH group, the simulation modeling would clearly
be biased, but Figure 3 shows that adding these new RRIs (open columns) to the six main
ecosystem groups does not alter the distributions. Nevertheless, the assumption that these
species are all recruited eventually to the biomass and catch would improve the ecosys-
tem model, so the diet matrix might be altered accordingly.
T
HE DESIGN OF AN MPA/AR SYSTEM IN HONG KONG
On the basis of the principles set out in the methods, we used four specific design
features for the MP A/AR system in Hong Kong: no-take artificial reefs, no-take corri-
dors, fished artificial reefs, and managed buffer zones.
556 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
Feature 1: No-Take Artificial Reef.—No-take ARs are engineered to maximize settle-
ment of benthic organisms and eventually corals, to provide food and shelter for high-
value commercial fishes, to provide refugia from fishing, to inhibit the use of trawl gear,
to minimize danger to marine traffic and scuba divers, and to be robust and stable in the
face of local water currents and substrate. The immediate AR area must be designated a
‘no-anchor zone’, so that anchors will not damage the AR structures. Moreover, the im-
mediate AR site must be designated a permanent ‘no-take’ zone for commercial fishing,
spearfishing, angling, shellfish harvesting, and other consumptive use of marine resources;
the ecological benefits depend on it. Recreational use, exclusive of fishing, could be
controlled by license, although we suggest that in the early years disturbance to coloniz-
ing organisms be limited to monitoring or educational activities.
The use of an extended buffer zone, the MPA, around the AR deployment sites is vital,
not only to ensure maximum benefit from ARs but also to allow for surveys to establish
density gradients that could be useful in determining migration rates used in the simula-
tion modeling.
Feature 2: No-take Corridor.—The importance to the rebuilding process of ecological
connectance, allowing fish to colonize and migrate among ARs, was recognized at public
forum consultations in Hong Kong. It can be implemented by protected no-take corridors
between reefs. Fishing would not be allowed in the no-take corridors, but other uses, such
Figure 3. Distributions of Reef Response Index for six fish groups in the ecosystem simulations.
The RRIs for fish species in the model (solid columns) are compared with total for all species
reported present in 1996 from Hong Kong (open columns).
557PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
as passage or anchorage of shipping, passage of underwater cables, and the like, should
not affect their ecological function.
Pairs of ARs connected by ‘no-take’ corridors provide insurance against the risk that
one of them might be damaged by some catastrophic event. Second, pairs provide repli-
cates for statistical analysis of the rebuilding. Once singletons are ruled out, application
of the maximum-species-in-an-area principle (see Methods) shows that, for a given amount
of AR structure, pairs of ARs are a better design than groups of three, four, or more.
Given the need for replication and insurance, pairs maximize the area-to-perimeter ratio
and therefore the niches for benthic reef-colonizing organisms, which in turn, increase
fish biodiversity. Figure 4a illustrates an MPA/AR design with features 1 and 2.
Feature 3: Fished Artificial Reef. —From an ecological point of view, artificial reefs
subjected to fishing might endanger the recovery of fish stocks or, by attracting and con-
centrating resources, make matters worse, but a management plan that allows some reefs
to be opened for fishing has three advantages. First, fishing on the artificial reefs is per-
ceived as important to the fishers’ life style; allowing fishing will encourage support
from the fishers’ community. Second, fished reefs provide a contrast in the data and con-
trols for monitoring. Third, permitted fishers may act to enhance monitoring and enforce-
ment. These social and information advantages may balance the loss of ecological ben-
efits.
The idea of the MP A/ARs as no-take sanctuaries could be promoted through visits by
Hong Kong fishers, together with scientists and government staff, to areas where commu-
nity management has increased fish stocks. This idea attracted much attention at the pub-
lic forum consultations.
The long-term advantages of having fishers come to regard artificial reefs as sacred
and unfishable sites would be considerable, but this is not a process that could be forced.
One indirect way to achieve this change in attitude would be to allow fishing on desig-
nated reefs so that fishers could clearly learn about the advantages of closure for them-
selves. Moreover, comparing catch on fishable ARs with catch from buffer areas around
permanently closed ‘no-take’ ARs, through involvement of educational programs, might,
over time, lead fishers to request a regime under which ‘fishable’ ARs become protected.
For this reason our design sacrifices one reef to fishing inside each MP A Each MP A will
therefore include three ARs, one of which is open to fishing, or four ARs, two of which
are open, if statistical replication is thought to override concern for restoration.
The identity of any reefs open to fishing should remain constant, to prevent confusion.
An alternative scheme that rotates the identity of fishable reefs would interfere with re-
building of long-lived species and be expensive to enforce. Fishing permits for ARs should
be issued only on condition of specified assistance with monitoring in the form of de-
tailed catch reporting, providing at least the location and date and the species, numbers,
and sizes of fish caught.
The use of a design where some reefs are closed and some are opened to controlled and
nondestructive fishing effort offers great potential for assessment of changes in produc-
tivity, but it also poses some risks. Along any fished boundary of an unfished area, local
depletion will result from gradients induced by fish movements into the protected area
(Walters et al., 1999). It is also important that fishable ARs be located far enough away
from closed areas, so that the fishable ARs will not ‘siphon’ fish away from the closed
MP A/AR complex. Figure 4B illustrates an MP A/AR design with features 1, 2, and 3.
558 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
Figure 4. Spatial aspects of the design of the MP A/AR system in Hong Kong. A (upper): only
ecological theory considered; (B) (middle): with the addition of monitoring requirements; (C) (lower):
with the addition of social aspects to encourage compliance. (Note other reef structures are used in
addition to sunken vessels.)
559PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
Feature 4: Managed Buffer Zone.—The fourth design feature is the establishment of a
managed buffer zone around the core no-take ARs and corridors. The buffer zone may be
divided into sectors that may be opened sequentially for fishing. From an ecological per-
spective, openings can be made contingent upon certain levels of fish stock rebuilding,
but this policy might have to be modified by the need to retain the allegiance of fishers.
Trawling must be banned from the MP A to permit recovery of important benthic habi-
tat and coral-reef rebuilding. It can be discouraged by the AR design (such as sunken
vessels) within the buffer zone, but other maritime and recreational activities (except
spearfishing and trophy angling, which defeat the purpose of the MPA) could be allowed
by permit.
At the cost of slower resource rebuilding than would result from closing the whole
MP A/AR, the buffer zone permits the benefits of rebuilding from the AR system to be
harvested by fishers themselves earlier than might otherwise be possible; it therefore
encourages support from fishers and the public. The fishing openings and closures keep
fishing under close control, and fishing permits that include mandatory catch reporting
will allow more thorough and rapid monitoring. The buffer-zone feature also offers much
scope for experimental manipulation to improve estimates of migration rates. For ex-
ample, a fish-tagging program could have local involvement. The fished artificial reef
should be located within the managed buffer zone, but it must be far enough away from
closed ARs not to act as a fish attraction device. The size of the unfished areas will affect
the ability of stocks to rebuild, as individual species depletion within the protected area
will occur through the movement of stocks. Figure 4C illustrates an MP A/AR design with
all four design features.
Fishing permits issued for the buffer zone or fished reef should specify reporting re-
quirements and catch limitations, including area and gear restrictions, minimum size of
indicator species, etc. Fishers’ cooperation in accurate reporting is vital to the success of
this type of evaluation, as misreporting of the area where fish are caught is a dominant
characteristic of noncooperative systems. Initial permit numbers can be estimated on the
basis of known ecology, fishing gears, and site characteristics of each MP A/AR complex.
Once baseline parameters are known from a postdeployment survey, increases can be
made contingent upon resource recovery. An adaptive management plan could be de-
signed to assist the permit-issuing system.
L
OCAL FISHING COMMUNITIES
Results of the consultations (a final government round is not completed at the time of
writing) are reported by ERM (1999). As expected, comments included suggestions by
small-vessel fishers that ARs be located closer to the shore. Trawlers wanted compensa-
tion for loss of trawling habitat. Others wanted closed areas located away from tradi-
tional, heavily-used inshore fishing grounds. Surprisingly, however, at the end of the fo-
rum program, Hong Kong fishers were about evenly divided between those supporting
design option 3, with buffer zones and regulated fishing openings, and those supporting
complete no-take closures in the MP As. Moreover, support for the initiative among fish-
ers is growing.
Further simulations suggest that even a small amount (less than 5%) of cheating inside
the no-take zones will rapidly erode rebuilding. In addition, cheating can be very selec-
tive, especially affecting longer-lived species, which are the slowest to recover, so success
of the MP A/AR initiative depends critically on maintaining contact with and outreach to
560 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
these fishing communities. For example a community-outreach program could include
confidential telephone hotlines for reporting illegal fishing backed up by a rapid response
to such reports by the authorities. Results of monitoring by analysis of dive surveys and
licensed fishing reports must be reported to local communities. Fishers must also develop
a sense of ownership of the regulations and enforcement by being involved in the ongoing
monitoring program. These issues are being evaluated by the SAR government for ongo-
ing support.
D
ISCUSSION
Are the multispecies, ecosystem-based predictions that we have attempted here more
robust than single-species work? Many marine ecologists would refuse to tackle the Hong
Kong problem, considering it too complex and difficult and imbued with too many uncer-
tainties. Moreover, our forecasts are challenged not only by statistical uncertainties from
the resource survey itself but also by the major process errors deriving from the proper-
ties of real aquatic ecosystems. Clearly, after the MP A/AR system is implemented, the
ecological system could have surprises in store for us, such as species substitutions, that
might well not be defined by our 15 ‘ecopath’ trophic groups. We absolutely must, there-
fore, monitor the system continuously and rerun the simulations in the light of changes
that occur. Nevertheless, this analysis represents our best shot using the present set of
tools available, and this work, we believe, represents the type of concerted action required
if we are to stand a hope of actually restoring marine ecosystems and their fisheries.
At present, our approach ignores the succession of species using ARs and their interac-
tions (see Russ and Alcala, 1996b). We would also expect that smaller, faster-growing
species would be the first to make use of ARs and that, as their biomass increased, they
would be the first to provide additional catch. Slower-growing species such as larger
groupers and snappers would probably begin to use the ARs as juveniles, but any major
change in biomass would take several years to be evident. Early indications from ARs
deployed during 1998 confirm that juveniles of slower growing snappers, groupers, breams,
and grunts have been the first to colonize the ARs. We need to find a better way to link
RRI scores to the ecosystem simulations. Splitting the model groups into reef and nonreef
species and tuning diet matrices to the new mix of recruited species should make signifi-
cant improvements.
Additional uncertainty arises if the cross-validation of species responses by reef ex-
perts and the literature summarized in FishBase proves misleading. Moreover, the esti-
mates of fish biomass and catch for Hong Kong could be made more robust by confirma-
tory survey and analysis (Pitcher et al., 1998).
Without a true spatial model of the Hong Kong fishery, we must make several assump-
tions that may be unfounded. One is that a single model adequately describes the Hong
Kong fishery now and in the future. Indeed, the central premise of these models is that the
basic structure of the system does not change over time. We improved our model by
creating a ‘Large Demersal Fish’ group, which is presently not a significant part of the
commercial catch but which is expected to increase in importance in the future with the
MP A/ARs. This is a minor example of a way of addressing the problem of qualitative
jumps in ecosystem structure. In the future, we hope to split model groups into reef-
associated and non-reef-associated species groups using the RRI scores as suggested above.
561PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
We also plan to address the problem by constructing models of past Hong Kong marine
ecosystems using the “Back to the Future” approach. Alternative ecosystem models may
also be found by examination of existing habitats in the South China Sea where such
severe degradation has not occurred, for example in the Dengan Dao (Lema) islands to
the south of Hong Kong, where reef habitats are reportedly in reasonably good condition
(K. Wilson, pers. comm.).
A second major assumption is that the biomass of all ecosystem groups is distributed
uniformly over the area of Hong Kong. This is unlikely to be true, and the model we used
is an average combining the estuarine western and oceanic eastern environments in Hong
Kong. More precise spatial information needed to partition the model is sparse for most
fish species at present. Moreover, our lack of precision in estimating migration rates does
not allow us to make firm estimates of the effects of MP A/ARs.
The annual increase in fishing mortality of 3% in our simulation modeling eroded the
biomass, and eventually the catch, of many ecosystem pools. Clearly, we would have
produced more optimistic results had we not included this factor, but for most scenarios,
the effect was at least mitigated by the use of the MP A/ARs. If fishing pressures could be
held constant, or even reduced, for example by a ban on trawling, we can show that the
biomass of most groups would increase faster and a more mature system would evolve,
where top predators form a larger part of commercial catches and where biomass levels
are better able to cope with environmental instability.
Although the physical presence of ARs does make some fishing methods, like trawl-
ing, more difficult or dangerous, it may actually assist small-scale fishers. For this reason
the design of the MP A/AR system is critical to success. Although the complete MP A/AR
closure in design of Figure 4A may be enthusiastically received by environmentalists, it is
unlikely to be entertained by fishing communities, who may see all or most of their tradi-
tional grounds sequestered, i.e., feel that they are bearing a disproportionate share of the
cost of conservation. The design in Figure 4B is better in that it preserves the integrity of
the MPA/AR complexes and connecting corridors while allowing sequential access to
buffer zones where fishing should be improved by migration from the reef sanctuary
area. The design in Figure 4C satisfies anticipated demand for ‘fishable ARs’, an out-
come of the community consultations in Hong Kong. It will, however, be vitally impor-
tant that fishable ARs be linked to permits setting out access and gear limitations and the
requirement to monitor catch and size.
In Hong Kong, the implementation of design features from option 3 at specific sites is
in the final public consultation phase; HK$100 million funding is secured. Seventeen
potential sites have been assessed on the basis of five ecological, three economic, and
three social criteria (ERM, 1999). Five Marine Special Areas (i.e., MP A/AR sites) are
currently being considered. One option is to sink 60 vessels, the most cost-effective AR
modules, to form AR complexes in each MPA according to the design criteria, but other
structures, including concrete, rock, and coated tires, are also being considered. It has
been recommended that ARs be emplaced within offshore MSAs because of the difficul-
ties encountered in reducing fishing effort and declaring MSAs at traditional coastal rocky-
shore fishing grounds (Wilson and Leung, 1998). However, it would be disappointing if,
as in the original plan, of the 10.3% of the Hong Kong area included in MSAs, only about
4% were to be permanently no-take. With the cooperation of local fishing communities,
perhaps more is politically achievable. Moreover, our modeling suggests that less than
10% no-take may be insufficient for major benefits to accrue fast enough for continued
562 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
public support. Moreover, this proportion may itself be split into five areas, so peripheral
losses will be greater than in the ecosystem modeling, which assumed one MPA area.
The results from the ecological modeling for this project were used to carry out a
bioeconomic analysis to determine the economic consequences of the different scenarios
explored (Sumaila, 1998b; ERM, 1999). Major uncertainties were maintained in the
bioeconomic projections, which examined the range of MP A/AR enhancements and re-
tained the projected increase in fishing power each year. The discount rate, the operating
costs and profits for each fishery sector, the costs of deploying the MP A/AR system, and
the costs of monitoring and enforcement under a range of scenarios were evaluated. Sce-
narios examined a range of options for illegal fishing inside the MP As and associated
costs of community-based monitoring and enforcement. The overall result, using the most
conservative set of ecological assumptions, but with cheating minimized through an ag-
gressive program of community involvement and 24-hour enforcement, suggested that
Hong Kong’ s fishery could provide, over 30 years, an additional 50% (US$150 million)
of discounted profit (ERM, 1999).
This system has been designed so that monitoring what happens in the MP A/ARs, and
to the fishery catches, can generate adjustments to the model and update the simulation
forecasts. Bortone (1998) reviews mixed experiences with previous AR research, and we
are painfully aware both of the shortcomings of our work and of the uncertainties affect-
ing final implementation. Nevertheless, our analyses suggest that the attempt to establish
MP A/ARs in this, one of the most devastated oceans of the world, will be worthwhile.
A
CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank S. Clarke of ERM (HK) Ltd. and the Agriculture and Fisheries Department (AFD) of
the Hong Kong SAR Government for providing general support and information throughout the
project, and for permission to publish these result. T. Courtney performed some of the stock
assessment and built the original Hong Kong ECOP ATH model; H. Valtysson helped with FishBase;
R. Brown and K. V odden helped with the initial Hong Kong community consultations; and N.
Polunin helped the team patiently score reef recovery indices for over 250 Hong Kong fish spe-
cies. D. Pauly, V . Christensen, and AFD commented on the manuscript. The views expressed are
the authors’ and do not necessarily reflect the views of AFD or the Hong Kong SAR Government.
LITERATURE CITED
Allison, G. W ., J. Lubchenco and M. H. Carr. 1998. Marine reserves are necessary but not sufficient
for marine conservation. Ecol. Appl. 8: S79–S92.
Aryuthaka, C. 1991. Meiofaunal community in Khung Kraban Bay, Chanthaburi, East Thailand.
Thai Mar. Fish. Res. Bull. (Rayong) 2: 47–57.
Beaumont, J. 1997. Community participation in the establishment and management of marine pro-
tected areas: a review of selected international experience. S. Afr. J. Mar. Sci. 18: 333–340.
Begon, M., J. L. Harper and C. Townsend. 1990. Ecology: individuals, populations and communi-
ties. Blackwell Science, Oxford. 945 p.
Boecklen, W . J. 1997. Nestedness, biogeographic theory and the design of nature reserves. Oecologia
112: 123–142.
Bohnsack, J. A. 1991. Habitat diversity and the design of artificial reefs. Pages 412–426 in S. S.
Bell, E. D. McCoy and H. R. Mushinsky, eds. Habitat structure: the physical arrangement of
objects in space. Chapman & Hall, London.
563PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
____________. 1993. Marine reserves. They enhance fisheries, reduce conflicts, and protect re-
sources. Oceanus 36: 63–71.
____________. 1996. Marine reserves, zoning, and the future of fishery management. Fisheries
(Bethesda) 21(9): 14–16.
____________, A.-M. Eklund and A. M. Szmant. 1997. Artificial reef research: is there more than
the attraction-production issue? Fisheries (Bethesda) 22(4): 14–16.
Bortone, S. A. 1998. Resolving the attraction-production dilemma in artificial reef research: some
yeas and nays. Fisheries 23(3): 6–11.
Botsford, L. W ., J. C. Castilla and C. H. Peterson. 1997. The management of fisheries and marine
ecosystems. Science 277: 509–515.
Brown, R. 1998. Community-based co-operative management: renewed interest in an old para-
digm. Pages 185–194 in T. J. Pitcher, P . J. B. Hart and D. Pauly, eds. Reinventing fisheries
management. Chapman & Hall, London.
Chan, K., and W . Tseng. 1982. A comparative study of the benthic fishes of Tolo Harbor and the
northeastern waters of Hong Kong. Pages 801–814 in B. Morton and C.-K. Tseng, eds. The
marine flora and fauna of Hong Kong and southern China: Proc. 1st Int’l. Mar. Biol. Workshop,
Hong Kong, 18 April-10 May 1980. Hong Kong Univ. Press, Hong Kong.
Chen, W . Z., Y . Z. Zheng, Y . Q. Chen and C. P . Mathews. 1997. An assessment of fishery yields
from the East China Sea Ecosystem. Mar. Fish. Rev. 59(4): 1–7.
Christensen, V . and D. Pauly. 1992. ECOPATH II—a software for balancing steady-state models
and calculating network characteristics. Ecol. Modell. 61: 169-185.
_____________ and _______, eds. 1993. Trophic models of aquatic ecosystems. ICLARM Conf.
Proc. Int’l. Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Int’l. Council for the Explora-
tion of the Sea: Danish Int’l. Development Agency, Manila and Copenhagen. 390 p.
Clark, C. W . 1996. Marine reserves and the precautionary management of fisheries. Ecol. Appl. 6:
369–370.
Cook, D. C. 1994. Marine ecosystem enhancement: conflict of interest or simply good housekeeping?
Hong Kong Marine Conservation Society, 1 Tramway Path, Hong Kong, Newsletter 16: 5–6.
_________, A. L. Chan, K. C. C. Fok and K. D. P . Wilson (in press). A fisheries resource profile
prior to artificial reef deployment in Hong Kong. In PACON 97, Symp. Resource Develop-
ment: Environmental Issues and Sustainable Development of Coastal Waters, Hong Kong.
Compagno, L. J. V . 1984a. FAO species catalogue, vol. 4, part 1: Sharks of the world. FAO Fisheries
Synopsis no. 125. 249 p.
______________. 1984b. FAO species catalogue, vol. 4, part 2: Sharks of the world. FAO Fisheries
Synopsis no. 125. 406 p.
ERM (Environmental Resources Management) Ltd. 1997. Artificial reef deployment study: Tech.
paper 2. AR deployment and management strategy. Environmental Resources Management Ltd.,
Chatham Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong. 152 p.
____. 1999. Artificial reef deployment study: final report. Environmental Resources Management,
Ltd., Chatham Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong. 114 p.
Frazer, T. K. and W . J. Lindberg. 1994. Refuge spacing similarly affects reef-associated species
from three phyla. Bull. Mar. Sci. 55: 388–400.
Froese, R. and D. Pauly. 1997. FishBase 97: concepts, design and data sources. Int’l. Center for
Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila. 257 p.
Gilbert, F ., A. Gonzalez and I. Evans-Freke. 1998. Corridors maintain species richness in the frag-
mented landscapes of a microecosystem. Proc. Roy. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 265: 577–582.
Gomez, E. D., E. Deocadiz, M. Hungspreugs, A. A. Jothy, K.-J. Kuan, A. Soegiarto and R. S. S. Wu.
1990. State of the marine environment in the East Asian Seas Region. U.N. Environment Pro-
gram, Regional Seas Reports and Studies 126. 69 p.
Guénette, S., T. Lauck and C. Clark. 1998. Marine reserves: from Beverton and Holt to the present.
Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 8: 251–272.
564 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
Haggan, N. 1998. Reinventing the tree: reflections on the organic growth and creative pruning of
fisheries management structures. Pages 19–30 in T. J. Pitcher, P . J. B. Hart and D. Pauly, eds.
Reinventing fisheries management. Chapman & Hall, London.
Hart, D. D. and R. J. Horowitz. 1991. Habitat diversity and the species area relationship: alternative
models and tests. Pages 47–68 in S. S. Bell, E. D. McCoy and H. R. Mushinsky, eds. Habitat
structure: the physical arrangement of objects in space. Chapman & Hall, London.
Heinke, G. W . 1996. South China Sea: coastal ecosystem management. Pages 805–812 In Proc.
Eco Informa ’96. Global Networks for Environmental Information, Environmental Research
Institute of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Hutchings, J. A. 1996. Spatial and temporal variation in the density of northern cod and a review of
hypotheses for the stock’ s collapse. Can. J. Fish. Aquat. Sci. 53: 943–962.
Jefferson, T. A. 1997. Multi-disciplinary research program on the Indo-Pacific hump-back dolphin
population. 3rd quarterly progress report. Hong Kong. 13 p.
____________, S. Leatherwood and M. A. Webber. 1993. Marine mammals of the world. FAO species
identification guide. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome. 320 p.
Jentoft, S. 1998. Social science in fisheries management: a risk assessment. Pages 177–184 in T. J.
Pitcher, P . J. B. Hart and D. Pauly, eds. Reinventing fisheries management. Chapman & Hall,
London.
Krebs, C. J. 1972. Ecology: the experimental analysis of distribution and abundance. Harper &
Row, New Y ork. 694 p.
Larkin, P . A. 1996. Concepts and issues in marine ecosystem management. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 6:
139–164.
Lai, L. W . C. and B. T. Yu. 1995. The Hong Kong solution to the overfishing problem: a study of the
cultured fish industry in Hong Kong. Manage. Decis. Econ. 16(5): 525–535.
Lauck, T., C. W . Clark, M. Mangel and G. Munro. 1998. Implementing the precautionary principle
in fisheries management through marine reserves. Ecol. Appl. 8: S72–S78.
Leung, A. W . Y . and C. K. C. Lee. 1987. On the application of catch and effort information from the
Hong Kong trawl fishery, and associated problems. Pages 306–323 In Report of the symposium
on the exploitation and management of marine fishery resources in southeast Asia, Darwin,
Australia, 16–19 February 1987. Rpt. no. 10. FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific,
Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission, Bangkok, Thailand.
_____________, K. F . Leung, K. Y . Lam and B. Morton. 1995. The deployment of an experimental
artificial reef in Hong Kong: objectives and initial results. Page 421 in Int’l. Conf. Ecological
System Enhancement Technology for Aquatic Environments, Tokyo, Japan: Proceedings. Japan
Int’l. Marine Science and Technology Federation, Tokyo.
Liao, I. C. and M. S. Su. 1984. Preliminary studies on the distribution and stomach contents of
some commercial prawns from the coast of Tungkang, Taiwan. TML Conf. Proc. 1: 57–71.
Macarthur, R. H. and E. O. Wilson. 1967. The theory of island biogeography. Princeton Univ. Press,
Princeton, New Jersey.
Mackinson, S., R. Sumaila and T. J. Pitcher. 1997. Bioeconomics and catchability: fish and fishers
behaviour during stock collapse. Fish. Res. (Amst.) 31: 11–17.
Morton, B. 1996. Editorial. Mar. Pollut. Bull. 32(1): 1.
Neis, B. 1995. Fishers’ ecological knowledge and marine protected areas. Pages 265–272 in N. L.
Shackell and J. H. M. Willison, eds. Marine protected areas and sustainable fisheries. Sci. Man-
age. Protected Areas Assoc., Wolfville, Nova Scotia.
Nguyen, T. A. 1989. Energy balance of the major tropical marine shelf ecosystem of Vietnam. Biol.
Morya (Vladivost.) 15(2): 78–83.
Patten, C. 1997. East and west. Macmillan, London. 340 p.
Pauly, D. and V . Christensen. 1993. Stratified models of large marine ecosystems: a general ap-
proach and an application to the South China Sea. Pages 148–174 in K. Sherman, L. M. Alexander,
and B. D. Gold, eds. Large marine ecosystems: stress, mitigation and sustainability. Amer. Assoc.
Advance. Sci., Washington, D.C.
565PITCHER ET AL.: RESTORATION IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA
_______, P . Martosubroto and J. Saeger. 1996. The MUTIARA 4 surveys in the Java and southern
South China Seas, November 1974 to July 1976. Pages 47–54 in D. Pauly and P . Martosubroto,
eds. Baseline studies in biodiversity: the fish resources of western Indonesia. Int’l. Center for
Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila.
_______, V . Christensen, J. Dalsgaard, R. Froese and F . Torres, Jr. 1998a. Fishing down marine food
webs. Science 279: 860–863.
_______, P . J. B. Hart and T. J. Pitcher. 1998b. Speaking for themselves: new acts, new actors and a
New Deal in a reinvented fisheries management. Pages 409–415 in T. J. Pitcher, P . J. B. Hart and
D. Pauly, eds. Reinventing fisheries management. Chapman & Hall, London.
Pinkerton, E., ed. 1989. Co-operative management of local fisheries. Univ. British Columbia Press,
Vancouver. 299 p.
__________ and M. Weinstein. 1995. Fisheries that work. Sustainability through community-based
management. The David Suzuki Fdtn., Vancouver, Canada. 199 p.
Pitcher, T. J. 1995. The impact of pelagic fish behaviour on fisheries. Sci. Mar. 59: 295–306.
_________. 1997. Fish shoaling behaviour as a key factor in the resilience of fisheries: shoaling
behaviour alone can generate range collapse in fisheries. Pages 143–148 in D. A. Hancock, D.
C. Smith, A. Grant and J. P . Beumer, eds. Developing and Sustaining World Fisheries Resources:
The State of Science and Management. 2nd World Fisheries Congr. CSIRO Australia,
Collingwood, Victoria.
_________. 1998. “Back to the Future”: a novel methodology and policy goal in fisheries. Pages 4–
7 in D. Pauly and D. Preikshot, eds. Back to the future: reconstructing the Strait of Georgia
ecosystem. Fisheries Centre, Univ. British Columbia, Vancouver.
_________. (in press). Rebuilding as a new goal for fisheries management: reconstructing the past
to salvage the future. Ecol. Appl.
__________ and D. Pauly. 1998. Rebuilding ecosystems, not sustainability, as the proper goal of
fishery management. Pages 311–329 in T. J. Pitcher, P . J. B. Hart and D. Pauly, eds. Reinventing
fisheries management. Chapman & Hall, London.
__________, R. Watson, A. M. Courtney and D. Pauly. 1998. Assessment of Hong Kong’ s inshore
fishery resources. Fisheries Centre Res. Rpts. 6 (1). Fisheries Centre, Univ. British Columbia,
Vancouver. 168 p.
_________, D. Pauly, N. Haggan and D. Preikshot (in press). “Back to the Future”: a method em-
ploying ecosystem modelling to maximise the sustainable benefits from fisheries. In B. Baxter,
ed. Alaska Sea Grant Symp. 1998.
Plyakarnchana, T. 1989. Yield dynamics as an index of biomass shifts in the Gulf of Thailand.
Pages 95–142 in K. Sherman and L. M. Alexander, eds. Biomass, yields and geography of large
marine ecosystems. AAAS Symp. 111. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Polovina, J. J. 1989. Artificial reefs: nothing more than benthic fish aggregators. Calif. Coop. Oce-
anic Fish. Invest. Rep. 30: 32–37.
Pomeroy, R. S. 1995. Community-based and co-management institutions for sustainable coastal
fisheries management in Southeast Asia. Ocean Coastal Manage. 27: 143–162.
Richards, J. 1985. Fisheries production in Hong Kong waters. Agriculture and Fisheries Depart-
ment, Hong Kong Government. Manuscript Rpt. 9 p.
_________, C. K. Chong, P . Mak and A. W . Y . Leung. 1985. Country report: Hong Kong. The
demersal fish resources of the northern shelf of the South China Sea. FAO/SEAFDEC Work-
shop on Shared Stocks in Southeast Asia, Bangkok (Thailand). FAO Fish. Rpt. FAO FIRM 337:
63–71.
Russ, G. R. and A. C. Alcala. 1989. Effects of intense fishing pressure on an assemblage of coral
reef fishes. Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 56: 13–27.
_________ and _________. 1996a. Do marine reserves export adult fish biomass? Mar. Ecol. Prog.
Ser. 132: 1–9.
_________ and _________. 1996b. Marine reserves: patterns of recovery and decline of large preda-
tory fish. Ecol. Appl. 6: 947–961.
566 BULLETIN OF MARINE SCIENCE, VOL. 66, NO. 3, 2000
Sarma, A. L. N., and V . Wilsanand. 1994. Littoral meiofauna of Bhitarkanika mangroves of river
Mahanadi system, east coast of India. Indian J. Mar. Sci. 23(4): 221–224.
Schmeigelow, F . 1997. Corridors as a tool in reserve design. Pages 23–24 in T. J. Pitcher, ed. The
design and monitoring of marine reserves. Fisheries Centre Res. Rpts. 5 (1). Fisheries Centre,
Univ. British Columbia, Vancouver.
Shin, P . K. and G. B. Thompson. 1982. Spatial distribution of the infaunal benthos of Hong Kong.
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. 10: 37–47.
Silvestre, G. and D. Pauly. 1997. Management of tropical coastal fisheries in Asia: an overview of
the key challenges and opportunities. Pages 8–25 in G. Silvestre and D. Pauly, eds. Status and
management of tropical coastal fisheries in Asia. Int’l. Center for Living Aquatic Resources
Management, Manila.
__________, S. Selvanathan and A. M. H. Salleh. 1993. Preliminary trophic model of the coastal
fisheries resources of Brunei Darussalam, South China Sea. Pages 300–306 in V. Christensen
and D. Pauly, eds. Trophic models of aquatic ecosystems. Int’l. Center for Living Aquatic Re-
sources Management, Manila.
Simberloff, D. 1997. Flagships, umbrellas and keystones: is single species management passe in
the landscape era. Biol. Conserv. 83: 247–257.
Soulé, M. E., A. C. Alberts and D. T. Bolger. 1992. The effects of habitat fragmentation on chaparral
plants and vertebrates. Oikos 63: 39–47.
Sumaila, U. R. 1998a. Protected marine reserves as fisheries management tools: a bioeconomic
analysis. Fish. Res. (Amst.) 37: 287–296.
___________. 1998b. Bioeconomics and the ECOP ATH/ECOSIM framework. Pages 19–20 in D.
Pauly, ed. The use of ECOP ATH with ECOSIM to evaluate strategies for sustainable exploita-
tion of multi-species resources. Fisheries Centre Research Reports 6 (2). Fisheries Centre, Univ.
British Columbia, Vancouver.
___________, S. Guénette, J. Alder and R. Chuenpagdee (in press). Addressing the ecosystem
effects of fishing using marine protected areas. ICES Ecosystem Effects of Fishing Symp.,
Montpellier, France, March, 1999.
Thompson, G. B., R. S. S. Wu and D. J. H. Phillips. 1982. A trawl survey of the benthos of Tolo
Harbour and Tolo Channel in 1978. Pages 745–760 in B. Morton and C.-K. Tseng, eds. The
marine flora and fauna of Hong Kong and southern China: Proc. 1st Int’l. Mar. Biol. Workshop,
Hong Kong, 18 April–10 May 1980. Hong Kong Univ. Press, Hong Kong.
Valente, R. M., N. C. Evans and P . G. D. Whiteside. 1996. Environmental monitoring in Hong Kong
using the REMOTS seabed camera. Coastal Manage. Trop. Asia (6): 26–29.
Walters, C., V . Christensen and D. Pauly. 1997. Structuring dynamic models of exploited ecosys-
tems from trophic mass-balance assessments. Rev. Fish Biol. Fish. 7: 139–172.
_________, D. Pauly and V . Christensen. 1999. Ecospace: prediction of mesoscale spatial patterns
in trophic relationships of exploited ecosystems, with emphasis on the impacts of marine pro-
tected areas. Ecosystems 2: 539–554.
Watson, R. and C. J. Walters. 1998. ECOSIM and MPAs: a quasi spatial use of ECOSIM. Pages 15–
18 in D. Pauly, ed. The use of ECOP ATH with ECOSIM to evaluate strategies for sustainable
exploitation of multi-species resources. Fisheries Centre Res. Rpts. 6 (2).
Wilson, K. D. P . and D. C. Cook. 1998. Artificial reef development: a marine protected area ap-
proach. Pages 529–539 in B. Morton, ed. Proc. 3rd Int’l. Conf. Mar. Biol. of the South China
Sea. Hong Kong Univ. Press, Hong Kong.
_____________ and A. Leung. 1998. Fisheries restoration and artificial reefs in Hong Kong. World
Wide Fund for Nature Hong Kong, About Life 3: 18–21.
Wu, R. S. S. 1988. Marine pollution in Hong Kong. Asian Mar. Biol. 5: 1–23.
A
DDRESSES: (T.J.P ., N.H., S.G.) Fisheries Centre, 2204 Main Mall, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver V6T 1Z4, Canada; (R.W .) Fisheries W estern Australia, 168 St. Georges Terrace, Perth,
Western Australia 6000, Australia; (R.K.) Environmental Resources Management Ltd, Chatham
Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong; (U.R.S.) Christian Michelsen Institute, P .O. Box 6031, Postterminalen,
N-5892, Bergen, Norway; (D.C., K.W ., A.L.) Agriculture and Fisheries Department, Canton Road,
Kowloon, Hong Kong.