S. Guénette, 2013 Bay of Bengal model 11 
 
is used. Effort is measured as the total number of hooks deployed by the area/region and by year (and quarter). 
For the bigeye tuna, three areas are used to stratify the CPUE data, and the eastern Indian Ocean that overlays the 
BOB area is used as to display effort and CPUE trends over time (data provided by Dr. Matsumoto, Far Seas 
Research Agency, Japan).  
 
For marlins, data aggregated for the entire Indian ocean is used to measure trends in CPUE and effort based on the 
Japanese and Taiwanese LL fleet from 1971 to 2012, though data across species of marlins were aggregated based 
on equal weights (for blue and striped marlin) as catches for these species are not well disaggregated in the data.  
 
For little tuna, like skipjack, data used were based on boat days of the pole and line fleet operating in the western 
Indian Ocean off the Maldives atolls (data provided by Dr. S. Adam, Marine Research Center, Maldives; see 
Appendix A2.4). The same type of data set was used for mackerel tuna (kawakawa). In both cases, the effort in 
number of boat-days was stratified by month and quarter though finally aggregated on a yearly basis. Data was 
limited and only available from 2004-2011 (8 years) and for this reason, were not used with Ecosim.  
Fish 
Of the 723 species listed for the Bay of Bengal, about 315 had growth, longevity or diet information. These species  
are listed in Appendix A1.3, grouped into functional groups. The name of fish functional groups is either based on 
the family name (e.g. Carangids) or the body size (Small, Medium, Large), the habitat (pelagic, oceanic, coastal), 
and their feeding habit: invertivore (inv) or piscivore (pisc). When assigned to a specific region, the name of a 
functional group starts with the region number (e.g. 2 L pisc).  
Diets 
Diets for fish were mainly taken from Fishbase (Froese and Pauly 2013) using preferably local and regional studies 
(see sources in Appendix A3.1). Diets from the FAO area 57 account for 8% (N=12), other parts of the Indian Ocean 
9%, the South China Sea 15%, and the Pacific (mainly western) 55%. Most diets for large pelagics (shar ks, tuna-like, 
scombrids) were obtained from Atlantic waters.   
 
Diets were compiled in a spreadsheet following the breakdown found in each publication. Foreign diet items were 
assigned a functional group based on size, trophic level and habitat similarity. In a large number of cases, a part of 
the diet is not defined (bony fish, finfish, etc.). These items were allocated to functional groups as a function of 
habitat and size possibilities. Thus, there is large uncertainty in the diet of several groups. In addition, some species 
considered as separate functional groups (e.g. hilsa, Indian mackerel) may be under-represented in diets, 
especially for diets from outside the study area.  
 
Coastal diet items consumed by large pelagics (sharks, tuna-like, scombrids) and other functional groups 
distributed in the whole area, were allocated by region in the same proportion as the region’s shelf area  (3.3%, 
22.8%, and 73.9% for regions 1, 2 and 3 respectively). This assumes that these species were distributed or obtained 
food equally on shelves as a function of the area available. This allocation works well for region 1 especially, the 
Maldives being a good area for sharks for instance, but with such a small shelf that the biomass of coastal fish is 
rather small compared to other regions. Being that there is more shelf area in region 3, most the predation on 
coastal fish for these groups would occur in region 3, an assumption that is debatable. The diets of hilsa and Indian 
mackerel were allocated to regions in proportion of the catch by region, assuming that catch reflects abundance . 
Fish surveys 
Estimates of biomass present in the area was obtained from the summary of the D r. Fridtjof Nansen Programme 
1975–1993 (Sætersdal et al. 1999) that covered Sri Lanka and the eastern coast of the Bay of Bengal, from 
Bangladesh to northern Sumatra, in 1978-1980. The survey did not cover India and the results for the Maldives are 
exploratory only as the vessel was too big to maneuver efficiently among atolls ( Strømme 1983). The survey was 
conducted using acoustics on the shelf (< 200 m depth) paired with trawl surveys conducted by local vessels. The 
report presented biomass estimates for pelagics and semi-demersals separately and then the trawl catch rates 
(kg/hour) for each family, and by country, and portion of the coasts in some cases (Myanmar, Sri Lanka, and 